, IwC Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) Direct Action The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968 (16 Vols.) 1. U.S. Programs in South Vietnam, November 1963-Aprii 1965 NSAM 273-NSAM 288-Honolulu, 19451967 VIETNAM TASK FORCE  SET #13 .'IwC.l. EVOLUTION OF THE WAR U. S. PROGRAMS IN SOUTH VU lNAM. MQV 1963 -APR 1965 NSAM 273NSAM 288 Coat Nr. X- 0295 . SUMMARY AND ANALYS1S . -- IwC.l U.S. PROGRAMS IN SOUTH VIETNAM, NOV 1963APR 1965; NSAM 273NSAM 288HONOLULU SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS During the period front the overthrow of the Diem government in November 1963 until the Honolulu Conference in April 1965, U.S. policy-makers were concerned with a continuing, central dilemma in South Vietnam. Aji agonizing, year-long internal debate took place against the double backdrop of this dilemma and Presidential election year politics. Although the results of this debate could not be clearly seen until mid-1965, the seeds which produced those results are clearly visible in the official files at least a year earlier. The basic problem in U.S. policy was to generate programs and other means adequate to secure the objectives being pursued. The central dilemma lay in the fact that while U.S. policy objectives were stated in the very most comprehensive terms the means employed were both consciously limited and purposely indirect. That is, the U.S. eschewed employing all of its military might -- or even a substantial portion of it -- in a battle which was viewed in Washington as determinative of the fate of all of Southeast Asia, probably crucial to the future of South Asia, and as the definitive test of U.S. ability to counteract communist support for "wars of national liberation." Moreover, this limited U.S. resource commitment to practically unlimited ends took an indirect form. U.S. efforts were aimed at helping the Government of Vietnam (GVN) to win its own struggle against the insurgcnts. This meant that the newly established GVN had to somehow mobilize its human and other resources, improve its military performance against the Viet Cong, and shift the tide of the war. As events in 1964 and 1965 were to demonstrate, the GVN did not succeed in achieving political stability. Its military forces did not stem the pattern of VC successes. Rather, a series of coups produced "revolving door" governments in Saigon. The military pattern showed, particularly by the spring of 1965, a precipitous decline in the fortunes of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN). Yet there was no serious debate in Washington on the desirability of modifying U.S. objectives. These remained essentia.11y fixed even as the means for their realization --limited U.S. material support for GVN -- underwent one crisis and disappointment after another. iThere were no immediate or forceful U.S. reactions in 1964 to this continuing political instability and military frustration in South Vietnam. Declaratory policy raced far ahead of resource allocations and use decisions. As events continued along an unfavorable course the U.S. pursued an ever-exoanding number of minor, specific, programmatic measures which were inherently inadequate either to reverse the decline or to satisfy broad U.S. objectives. Concurrently, the U.S. began to make contingency plans for increasing pressures against NVN. It did not make similar plans for the commitment of U.S. ground forces in SVN. In the aftermath of President Johnson's landslide electoral victory in November 1964, and in the face of persistent instability in SVN, the Administration finally expanded the war to include a limited, carefully controlled air campaign against the north. Early in 1965 it deployed Marine battalions to South Vietnam. By April 1965, while continuing to follow the announced policy of efforts to enable GVN to win its own war, the U.S. had adumbrated a policy of U.S. military participation which presaged a high degree of Americanization of the war effort. This evolving expansion and demonstration of commitment was neither continuous nor steady. The steps forward were warmly debated, often hesitant, sometimes reluctant. But all of the steps taken were still forward toward a larger commitment; there were none to the rear. THE INITIAL PERIOD NOVEMBER 1963MARCH 1964 The Diem coup preceded President Kennedys assassination by less than a month. Thus, a new leader took the helm in the U.S. at a natural time to reevaluate U.S. policies and U.S.-GVN relations. President Johnsons first policy announcement on the Vietnamese war, contained in NSAM 273 (26 November 1963), only three days after he had assumed the Presidency, was intended primarily to endorse the policies pursued by President Kennedy and to ratify provisional decisions reached in Honolulu just before the assassination. Even in its attempt to direct GVN's efforts toward concentration on the Delta area, NSAM 273 reflected earlier U.S. preferences which had been thwarted or ignored by Diem. Now was the time, many of the top U.S. policymakers hoped, when convincing U.S. support for the new regime in Saigon might allow GVN to start winning its own war. Two developments -- in addition to the VC successes which followed Diem's downfall -- undercut this aura of optimism. First, it was discovered that the situation in SVN had been worse all along than reports had indicated. Examples of misleading reports were soon available in washington at the highest levels. Second, the hoped-for political stability was never evenestablished before it disintegrated in the Khanh coup in January 1964. By February MACVs year-end report for 1963 was available in Washington. Its gloomy statistics showed downward trends in almost every area. iiIncluded in the MACV assessment was the opinion that military effort could not succeed in the absence of effective political leadership. A special CIA report, forwarded to Secretary McNamara at about the same time made the opposite point military victories were needed to nourish the popular attitudes conducive to political stability. Assistant Secretary of State Roger Hilsman -- who would shortly leave office after his views were rejected -- stressed the need for physical security in the rural areas and the adoption of counterguerrila tactics as the preconditions to success. These interesting reversals of nominal functional preferences indicate that there was at least a sufficiently broad awareness within U.S. Officialdom to permit a useful debate on U.S. actions which might deal more successfully with this seamless web of political-military issues. Certainly the Intelligence pi cture was dark enough to prompt such a debate the SNIE on short-term prospects in Southeast Asia warned that "...South Vietnam has, at best, an even chance of withstanding the insurgency menace during the next few weeks or months." The debate did begin, but in hobbles. The generally agreed necessity to work through GVN and the felt imperative to strengthen GVN left the U.S. in a position of weakness. It was at least as dependent on GVN leaders as were the latter on U.S. support. Moreover, mid-1964 was not an auspicious time for new departures in policy by a President who wished to portray "moderate" alternatives to his opponents "radical" proposals. Nor was any time prior to or immediately following the elections very appealing for the same reason. Thus, while the debate in high official circles was very, very different from the public debate it still reflected the existence of the public debate. LIMITED MEASURES FOR LIMITLESS AIMS The first official internal pronouncement to reflect this difficult policymaking milieu was NSAM 288, in March 1964. Approved verbatim from the report of the most recent McNamara-Taylor visit to Vietnam, it was virtually silent on one issue (U.S. troops) and minimal in the scale of its recommendations at the same time that it stated U.S. objectives in the most sweeping terms used up to that time. Tile U.S. objective was stated to be an "independent, non-communist South Vietnam, free to accept assistance as required to maintain its security" even though not necessarily a member of the Western alliance. The importance of this objective was underscored in a classic statement of the domino theory Unless we can achieve this objective in South Vietnam, almost all of Southeast Asia will probably fall under Communist dominance (all of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia), accommodate to Communism so as to remove effective U.S. and anti-Communist influence (Burma), or fall under the domination of forces not now explicitly Communist but likely then to become so (Indonesia taking over Malaysia). Thailand might hold for a period with our help, but would be under grave pressure. Even the Philippines would become shaky, and the threat to India to the west, Australia and New Zealand to the south, and Taiwan, Korea, and Japan to the north and east would be greatly increased. iii .By NWD Date 201 1 The present situation in SVN was painted in somber tones of declining GVN control and deterioration within ARVN while VC strength and NVN-supplied arms were on the rise. To introduce U.S. combat troops for the protection of Saigon under these circumstances, McNamara stated, would create "serious adverse psychological consequences and should not be undertaken." A U.S. movement from the advisory role to a role which would amount to command of the war effort was similarly rejected without discussion because of anticipated adverse psychological effects. Thus, the fear of undesirable impacts upon a weak GVN caused at least one major course of action to be ruled out. Although fears of adverse impacts in domestic U.S. politics were not mentioned it is inconceivable that such fears were not present. Having ruled out U.S. active leadership and the commitment of U.S. troops, Secretary McNamara analyzed three possible courses of action (1) negotiations leading to the "neutralization" of SVN; (2) the initiation of mi i y actions against NVN; and (3) measures to improve the situation in SVN. The first of these was incompatible with the U.S. objective stated at the beginning of the NSAM; the time was not propitious for adoption of the second; the third was recommended for adoption. Additionally, Secretary McNamara recommended NSAM 288 proclaimed that plans be made so that the U.S. would be in a position at a later date to initiate military pressures against NVN within a relatively brief time after any decision to do so might be made. Many of the steps approved in NSAM 238 were highly programmatic. It should be observed that they were also palliative, both in scope and degree. Of the twelve approved actions, two addressed possible future actions beyond the borders of South Vietnam. Of the remaining ten, three were declaratory in nature (e.g., "To make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government and are opposed to. any further coups"). The seven actions implying additional U.S. assistance (some of it advice) dealt with such matters as exchanging 25 VNAF aircraft for a newer model, replacing armored personnel carriers with a more reliable model, and trebling the fertilizer program within two years. The additional cost of the programs was only slightly more than $60 million at the most $30-$4O million to support a 50,000 man increase in RVNAF and to raise pay scales; $1.5 million to support an enlarged civil administrative cadre; and a one time cost of $20 million for additional and replacement military equipment. It is clear with the advantage of hindsight that these steps were grossly inadequate to the magnitude of the tasks at hand -- particularly if the broad U.S. objectives stated in the NSAM were to be realized. But such hindsight misses the policymakers' dilemma and the probable process by which the approved actions were decided upon. President Johnson had neither a congressional nor a popular mandate to Americanize the war or to expand it dramatically by "going north." U.S. hopes were pinned on assisting in the development of a GVN strong enough to win its own war. Overt U.S. leadership might undercut the development of such a government in Saigon. The course of policy adopted was not the product of an attempt to select the "best" alternative by means of examining expected benefits; it resulted from a determination of the "least bad" alternative through an examination ivof risks and disadvantages. It reflected what was politically feasible rather than what was desirable in relation to stated objectives. The practical effect of this understandable -- perhaps inescapable and inevitable way of deciding upon U.S. policy was to place almost complete responsibility in the hands of the GVN for the attainment of U.S. objectives -it being assumed that GVN's objectives were compatible with ours. Midway through 1964 President Johnson changed the entire top level of U.S. leadership in Saigon. General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, retired from active military duty (for the second time) to become the U.S. Ambassador. An experienced and highly regarded career diplomat, U. Alexis Johnson, was appointed deputy to Taylor. General william C. Westmoreland stepped up from deputy to commander of U. S. military forces in Vietnam. The new "first team" was not without knowledge about Vietnam but it inescapably lacked the close personal knowledge of leading GVN figures which only time and close association can develop. It set about attempting to help the Khanh government to help itself. General Khanh, in the event, proved unable to marshal SVN s resources and to establish his regime in a position of authority adequate either to stem or to turn the VC tide. Khanhs failure was, however, neither precipitous nor easily perceivable at the time. As the U.S. entered and passed through a Presidential campaign in which the proper policy to pursue in Vietnam was a major issue, it sometimes appeared that the GVN was making headway and sometimes appeared that it was not. U.S. policy remained virtually unchanged during this period although significant planning steps were accomplished to permit the U.S. to exercise military pressures against NVN should it appear desirable (and politically feasible) to do so. Thanks to such planning, the Tonkin Gulf incidents of 2-4 August 1964 were answered by "tit-for-tat" reprisal raids with considerable dispatch. The cost was minimal in terms of world opinion and communist reaction. Moreover, President Johnson used the Tonkin Gulf incidents as the springboard to a broad endorsement by the Congress of his leadership and relative freedom of action. When this was followed in November by what can only be described as a smashing victory at the polls, the Presidents hands were not completely untied but the bonds were figuratively loosened. His feasible options increased. LIMITED ESCALATION LEADS TO OPEN-ENDED INTERVENTION Immediately following his election, the President initiated an intense, month-long policy review. An executive branch consensus developed for a two phase expansion of the war. Phase I was limited to intensification of air strikes in Laos and to covert actions in NVN. Phase II would extend the war to a sustained, escalating air campaign against North Vietnamese targets. The President approved Phase I for implementation in December 1964 but approved Phase II only "in principle." The effect of this decision was to increase the expectation that theair campaign against NVN would be undertaken if the proper time arose. vWhat conditions were proper was the subject of considerable disagreement and confusion. Tactically, the U.S. desired to respond to North Vietnamese acts rather than to appear to initiate a wider war. But the strategic purposes of bombing in NVN were in dispute. The initiation of an air campaign was deferred early in 1964 as a prod to GVN reform. By 1965 such initiation was argued for as a support for GVN morale. Some adherents claimed that bombing in NVN could destroy the DRV's will to support the war in South Vietnam. others expected it to raise the price of North Vietnam's effort and to demonstrate U.S. commitment but not to be decisive in and of itself. The only indisputable facts seem to be that the long planning and debate over expanding the air war, the claimed benefits (although disputed), and the relatively low cost and risk of an air campaign as compared to the commitment of U.S. ground forces combined to indicate that the bombing of NVN would be the next step taken if nothing else worked. Nothing else was, in fact, working. General Khanhs government was reorganized in November 1964 to give it the appearance of civilian leader-ship. Khanh finally fell in mid-February 1965 and was replaced by the Quat regime. Earlier that month the insurgents had attacked the U.S. base at Pleiku, killing eight Americans. Similar attacks late in 1964 had brought about recommendations for reprisal attacks. These had been dis-approved because of timing. On this occasion, however, the President approved the FLAMING DART retaliatory measures. Presidential assistant McGeorge Bundy was in SVN when the Viet Cong attacked the U.S. facilities in Pleiku. He recommended to the President that, in addition to retaliatory measures, the U.S. initiate phase II of the military measures against NVN. The fall of the Khanh regime a week later resurrected the worst U.S. fears of GVN political instability. The decision to bomb north was made, announced on 28 February, and strikes initiated on 2 March. A week later, after a request from Generals Taylor and Westmoreland which was debated little if at all, two battalion landing teams of Marines went ashore at DaNang to assume responsibility for security of the air base there. U.S. ground combat units were in an active theater on the mainland of Asia for the first time since the Korean War. This may not have been the Rubicon of the Johnson administration's Vietnam policy but it was a departure of immeasurable significance. The question was no longer one of whether U.S. units should be deployed to SVN; rather, it was one of how many units should be deployed and for what strategic purposes. The Army Chief of Staff, General Harold K. Johnson, went to Saigon in mid-March and recommended that bombing restrictions be lifted and that a U.S. division be deployed to SVN for active combat. General Taylor strongly opposed an active combat -- as distinct from base security -- role for U.S. ground forces. But the President decided on 1 April to expand the bombing, to add an air wing in SVN, and to send two more Marine battalions ashore. These decisions were announced internally on 6 April in NSAM 328. General Taylor continued to voice strong opposition to a ground combat role for U.S. forces but his voice was drowned out by two developments. viFirst, the air campaign against NVN (ROLLING THUNDER) did not appear to be shaking the DRWs determination. Second, ARVN experienced a series of disastrous defeats in the spring of 1965 which convinced a number of observers that a political-military collapse within GVN was imminent. As the debate in Washington on next steps revealed, something closely akin to the broad objectives stated over a year earlier in NSAM 288 represented a consensus among U.S. policymakers as a statement of proper U.S. aims. The domestic political situation had changed materially since early 1964. President Johnson was now armed with both a popular mandate and broad Congressional authorization (the extent of which would be challenged later, but not in 1965). Palliative measures had not been adequate to the task although they had continued and multiplied throughout the period. As General Taylor wryly remarked to McGeorge Bundy in a back channel message quoted in the following paper, the U.S. Mission in Saigon was charged with implementing a 21-point military program, a 41-point non-military program, a l6-point USIS program, and a 12-point CIA program "...as if we can win here somehow on a point score." As fears rose in Washington it must have seemed that everything had been tried except one course -- active U.S. participation in the ground battle in SVN. Palliative measures had failed. ROLLING THUNDER offered little hope for a quick decision in view of the rapid deterioration of ARVN. The psychological barrier against the presence of U.S. combat units had been breached. If the revalidated U.S. objectives were to be achieved it was necessary for the U.S. to make quickly some radical departures. It was politically feasible to commit U.S. ground forces and it seemed desirable to do so. Secretary McNamara met in Honolulu on 20 April with the principal U.S. leaders from Saigon and agreed to recommend an enclave strategy requiring a quantum increase above the four Marine battalions. An account of the rapidity with which this strategy was overtaken by an offensively oriented concept is described in another volume in this series. The present volume describes the situational changes, the arguments, and the frustrations as the U.S. attempted for over a year to move toward the realization of ambitious objectives by the indirect use of very limited resources and in the shadow'of a Presidential election campaign. IwC.5 Phase I in the Build-Up of U.S. Forces; The Debate, March-July 1965.'vii . TABLE OF CONTENTS AND TEXT, IwC.l. U. S. PROGRAMS IN SOUTH VIETNAM, NOVEMBER 1963APRIL 1965 NSAM 273 NSAM 288 TABLE OF CONTENTS AND OUTLINE Page I. NSAM 273... 1 1. NSAM 273The Aftermath of Diem. 1 2. First Reappraisals of the Situation in South Vietnam. 4 3- First Actions on NSAM 273 and First Misgivings 15 4. Efforts to lmprove Intelligence on Progress of the War... 21 5 The Unrealized January Upturn and the Khanh Coup.. 25 6. Deepening Gloom in February.. 30 7 Two General Alternative Directions of Policy... 35 8. The Fact Finding Mission and NSAM 288 . 40 9- NSAM 288 46 II. NSAM-288TONKIN GULF... 56 1. General Character of the Period from NSAM-288 to Tonkin Gulf... 56 2. NSAM-288 Programs Mid-March to Mid-May 1964 58 3- The Secretarys Visit to Saigon May 1964... 70 4. The Honolulu Conference of 30 May 1964. 76 5 Preparation for Increased Pressure on North Vietnam. 82 6. Increasing U.S. Involvement and Growing GVN Instability.. 85 III. FROM TONKIN TO NSAM-328 .. 90 1. Tonkin Gulf and Following Political Crises 90 2. Policies in the Period of Turmoil.. 95 3. The Period of Increasing Pressures on NVN.. 98 Iw NSAM-328... 110 a -1 -- . CHRONOLOGY . IwC.l. U. S. PROGRAMS IN SOUTH VIETNAM. NOVEMBER 1963April 1965 NSAM 273NSAM 288 DATE CHRONOLOGY EXENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 20 Nov 1963 Honolulu Conference Secretaries McNamara and Rusk and their party meet with the entire US country team and review the South Vietnamese situation after the Diem coup. 22 Nov 1963 Kennedy Assassination President Kennedy is assassinated in Dallas. Lodge confers with the new President, Johnson, in washington, during the next few days. 26 Nov 1963 FWc.-," NSAM 273 Drawing on the Honolulu Conference and Lodges conversations with the President, NSAM 273 established US support for the new Minh government and emphasized that the level of effort, economic and military, would be maintained at least as high as to Diem. All US and GVN efforts were to be concentrated on the Delta where the VC danger was greatest. But the war remained basically a South Vietnamese affair to win or lose. 6 Dec 1963 Report on Long An Province A report by a USOM provincial representative on Long An Province, adjacent to Saigon, describes the near complete disintegration of the strategic hamlet program. The basic problem is the inability or unwillingness of the ARVN to provide timely support when villages are under attack. Hamlets are being overrun by the VC on an almost daily basis. Ambassador Lodge forwards the report to Washington. 17 Dec 1963 NSC Meeting After hearing a briefing by General Krulak that falls short of giving an adequate explanation for the Long An report, the President decides to send McNamara on another fact-finding trip. 18-20 Dec 1963 SecDef Trip to Vietnam During this quick visit to South Vietnam, McNamara ordered certain immediate a-2 . 'l' DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 18-20 Dec (Contd) actions to be taken by the US Mission to improve the situation in the 13 critical provinces. He returns directly to Washington to report to the President. 21 Dec 1963 McNamara Report to the President McNamaras report substantiates the existence of significant deteriorationin the war since the preceding summer. He recommends strengthened ARVN formations in the key provinces, increased US military and civilian staffs, the creation of a new pacification plan, and better coordination between Lodge and Harkins. His report is especially pessimistic about the situation in the Delta. 7 Jan 1964 McCone Proposes Covert Reporting The serious failure of the reporting system to indicate the critical state of deterioration of the war prompts McCone to recommend to McNamara a special TDY covert CIA check on the in-country reporting system to make recommendations for improving it. 16 Jan 1964 McNamara Accepts Revised McCone Proposal McNamara accepts a revised form of McCone's proposal, specifically ruling out any IG-like aspects to the study. 28 Jan 1964 Khanh Warns US Aide of Pro-Neutralist Coup General Khanh, I Corps Commander, warns his US advisor, Colonel wilson that pro-neutralist members of the MRC Xuan, Don, and Kim are plotting a coup. 29 Jan 1964 Khanh Warns Lodge Khanh repeats to Lodge the warning that pro-neutralist elements are planning a coup. Lodge recommends an intervention with Paris to get DeGaulle to restrict his activity in Saigon. Khanhs efforts are really a screen for his own planned coup. 30 Jan 1964 Khanh Coup Early in the morning, Khanh acts to take over control of the government in a bloodless internal coup that a-3 . DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 30 Jan 1964 (Contd) removes the civilian government and puts him in power. 2 Feb 1964 MACV Personal Assessment of 4th Qtr CY 1963 The Diem coup and the subsequent political instability in the fall of 1963 are given by MACV as the main reasons for the rise in VC activity and the decline in GVN control of the country. The tempo of GVN operations was good but the effectiveness low. Military failures were largely attributed to political problems. 10 Feb 1964 CAS Group's Preliminary Report The preliminary report of the special CAS group cross-checking the reporting system confirms the deterioration of the strategic hamlet program. It documents the decline in rural security and the increase in VC attacks. 12 Feb 1964 SNIE 50-64 This intelligence community evaluation of the short-term prospects for Vietnam confirms the pessimism now felt in all quarters. The political instability is the hard core problem. 18 Feb 1964 Final CAS Group Report JCSM 136-64 The final CA.S group report confirms the black picture of its initial estimate in greater detail and further confirms the previous failings of the reporting system. In addition to a long list of recommendations for GVN action, the JCS propose to SecDef major US escalatory steps including bombing of the North. 21 Feb 1964 MACV Comment on CAS Group Findings General Harkins takes issue not with the specific factual reporting of the CAS Group, but with their broader conclusions about the direction the war is going, and the respective effectiveness of the VC and GVN. 2tMar 1964 JCSM-174-64 The JCS outline their proposal for punitive action against the DRV to halt Northern support for the VC insurgency. Bombing is specifically called for.  a-4, DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 8 Mar 1O64 SecDef and CJCS Begin Five-Day Trip to SVN The President sends Secretary McNamara and General Taylor on another fact-finding trip to prepare for a major re-evaluation of the war and US involve-ment. While there, a set of recommen-dations to the President is decided upon. 12 Mar 19611 McNamara-Taylor see Khanh Prior to their departure, McNamara and Taylor present their principal con-clusions to General Khanh who is re-sponsive to their suggestions and, in particular, declares his readiness to move promptly on a national mobiliza-tion and increasing ARVN and Civil Guard. 14 Mar 1964 Hilsman sends Final Memos to SecState Having resigned over policy disagreement, Hilsman sends Rusk parting memos on SEA and SVN. He describes two principles basic to success in guerrilla warfare (1) the oil blot approach to progres-sive rural security; and (2) the avoi-dance of large-scale operations. He further opposes redirecting the war effort against the North. Political stability is absolutely essential to eventual victory. JCSM-222-64 The JCS, in commenting on McNamara's proposed recommendations to the President, reiterate their views of 2 March that a program of actions against the North is required to effectively strike at the sources of the insurgency. The overall military recommendations pro-posed by McNamara are inadequate, they feel. 16 Mar 1964 SecDef Recommendations to the President Largely ignoring the JCS reclama, McNamara reports on the conclusions of his trip to Vietnam and recommends the full civilian and military mobili-zation to which General Khanh has committed himself. This is to be accompanied by an extensive set of internal reforms and organizational improvements. Some increases in US personnel, are recommended along with increased materiel support for the GVN. a- 5 . 1 S DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 17 Mar 1964 NSAM 288 The President accepts McNamaras full report and has it adopted as NSAM 288 to guide national policy. The im-portance of South Vietnam to US policy and security is underlined and the extent of the US commitment to it in-creased. While significant increases in actual US participation in the war are rejected as not warranted for the moment, the JCS are authorized to begin planning studies for striking at the sources of insurgency in the DRw 1 Apr 1964 Enbassy Saigon Msg 1880 Lodge reports per State request that Khanh's proposed mobilization measures call for both civilian and military build-ups. 4 Apr 1964 Khanh Announces Mobilization Khanh announces that all able-bodied males aged 20 to 45 will be subject to national public service, either military or civilian. W. P. Bundy Letter to Lodge In a letter to Lodge, Bundy asks him to comment on a scenario for mobiliz-ing domestic US political support for action against the DRw 15 Apr 1964 Lodge reports on Mobilization Lodge reports that Khanh1s 4 April announcement was only the precursor of the legal decrees the essence of which he described. 15-20 Apr 1964 General Wheeler, CofSUSA, Visits Vietnam The Army Chief of Staff, General Earl wheeler visits Vietnam to make a sur-vey and represent the SecDef during the visit of Secretary Rusk. On 16 April, he meets with Khanh who first mentions his view that the war will eventually have to be taken to the North. 17-20 Apr 1964 Rusk Visits Saigon r Secretary Rusk and party visit Saigon. On 18 April, Rusk sees Khanh who again mentions the eventual necessity of carrying the fight to the North. Rusk replies that such a significant escala-tion of the war would require much a6DATE 17-20 April (Contd) 25 Apr 1964 29 Apr 1964 30 Apr 19611 EVENT OR DOCUMENT President Names General Westmoreland to Succeed General Harkins JCS Msg 6073 to MACV Lodge, Brent and Westmoreland See Khanh Enbassy Saigon Msg 1889 EXDIS for the President 2 May 1964 4 May 1964 Lodge Reports on Delay in Mobilization Embassy Saigon Msg 2112 6 May 1964 NSC Meeting DESCRIPTION thought and preparation. At the 19 April meeting with the Country Team, much of the discussion is devoted to the problem of pressures against the North. General William westmoreland is named to succeed General Harkins in the summer. The JCS, worried at the GVN delay, ask MACV to submit the force plan for 1964 by 7 May. In a showdown with Khanh, Lodge, Brent and Westmoreland state that the fundamental problem is lack of administrative support for the provincial war against the VC, particularly the inadequacy of the piastre support for the pacification program. Khanh promises more effort. Lodge informs the President that Khanh has agreed to US advisors in the pacified areas if we are willing to accept casualties. Lodge recommends one advisor for each corps area and one for Khanh, all reporting to Lodge. Lodge reports that the draft mobilization decrees have still not been signed or promulgated. Having asked to see Lodge, Khanh asks him whether he, Lodge, thinks the country should be put on a war footing. Khanh wants to carry the war to the North and sees this as necessary preliminary. The NSC confirms Rusks caution to Khanh on any moves against the North. The President asks McNamara to make a fact-finder to Vietnam. aT . DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 7 May 1964 MACV, USGVN 1964 Force Level Agree-ment MACV informs the JCS that agreement has been reached with the GVN on the level of forces to be reached by years end. 12-14 1964 May McNamara-Taylor Mission McNamara-Taylor visit SVN. They are briefed on 12-13 April by the Mission. On 14 April they see Khanh who again talks of going North. McNamara demurs, but insists on more political stability and program effectiveness. 30 May 1964 Honolulu Conference Rusk, McNamara, McCone and aides meet in Honolulu with the Country Team. A full dress discussion of pressures takes place, but no decisions or recom-mendations are approved. Rather, more emphasis on the critical provinces is approved, along with an expanded ad-visory effort. 5 Jun 1964 Department of State Msg 2184 Lodge is informed of the President's approval of the expanded effort in the critical provinces. 15 Jun 1964 W. Pe Bundy memo to SecState and SecDef Attached to a Bundy memo for considera-tion at a meeting later the same day, are six annexes each dealing with a different aspect of the problem of getting a Congressional resolution of support for the current US Southeast Asian policy. One of the important themes is that an act of irreversible US commitment might provide the neces-sary psychological support to get real reform and effectiveness from the GVN. 23 Jun 1964 President Announces JCS Chairman Taylor as New Ambassador President Johnson announces the appointment of JCS Chairman, Maxwell Taylor, to succeed Lodge, who is returning to engage in Republican Presidential politics. 30 Jun 1964 Taylor Succeeds Lodge Lodge leaves Saigon and Taylor takes over as US Ambassador with U. Alexis Johnson as DeputyDATE 7 July 1964 EVENT OR DOCUMENT Taylor Forms Mission Council 8 Jul 1964 Taylor Calls on Khanh DESCRIPTION Hl an effort to streamline the Embassy and increase his policy -control, Taylor forms the Mission Council at the Country Team level. Taylor calls on Khanh who expresses satisfaction with the new personnel, approves the Mission Council idea and offers to create a counter part organi-zation. 10 Jul 1964 15 Jul 1964 17 Jul 1964 19 Jul 1964 23 Jul 1964 24 Jul 1964 Department of State Msg 108 Taylor reports in-creased VC strength, Embassy Saigon Msgs 107 and 108 USOM Meets With GVN NSC Khanh Makes Public Reference to "Going North" Taylor Meets with Khanh and NSC Taylor and Khanh discuss Coups 2 Aug 1964 USS Maddox Attacked in Tonkin Gulf a- 9 The President asks Taylor to submit regular month-end progress reports on pl 1 aspects of the program. Taylor raises the estimate of Viet Cong strength from the previous total of 28,000 to 34,000. This does not repre-sent a sudden increase, but rather intelligence confirmation of long sus-pected units. As he had promised, Khanh creates a coordinating group within the GVN to deal with the new Mission Council and calls it the NSC. In a public speech, Khanh refers to the "March to the North." In a sepa-rate statement to the press, General Ky also refers to the "march North." In a meeting with Khanh and the NSC, Taylor is told by Khanh that the move against the North is indispensible to the success of the counterinsurgency campaign in the South. In a discussion of coup rumors, Khanh complains that it is US support of Minh that is behind all the trouble, Taylor reiterates US support for Khanh. The destroyer USS Maddox is attacked in the Toilkin Gulf by DRV patrol craft while on a DE SOTO patrol off the DRV coast. Several patrol boats sunk.DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 4 Aug 1964 Maddox and C. Turner Joy Attacked In a repetition of the 2 August incident, the Maddox and the C. Turner Joy are attacked. After strenuous efforts to confirm the attacks, the President authorizes reprisal air strikes against the North. 5 Aug 1964 US Reprisals US aircraft attack several DRV patrol boat bases, destroying ships and facilities. 1 7 Aug 19611 Tonkin Gulf Resolutions At the time of the attacks, the President briefed leaders of Congress, and had a resolution of support for US policy introduced. It is passed with near-unanimity by both Houses. Khanh Announces State of Emergency Khanh announces a state of emergency that gives him near-dictatorial powers. 10 Aug 1964 Taylors first Monthly Report In his first monthly report to the President, Taylor gives a gloomy view of the political situation and of Khanhs capacities for effectively pursuing the war. He is equally pessimistic about other aspects of the situation. 11 Aug 1964 President Signs Tonkin Resolution The President signs the Tonkin Gulf Resolution and pledges full support for the GVN. 12 Aug 1964 Taylor and Khanh Meet Khanh discusses with Taylor his plan to draw up a new constitution enhancing his own powers. Taylor tries to discourage him. 14 Aug 19 611 Khanh shows Taylor Draft Charter At GVN NSC meeting, Khanh shows Taylor his proposed draft Constitution. Taylor dislikes its blatant ratification of Khanh as dictator. 16 Aug 1964 Khanh Names President with the promulgation of the new constitution, Khanh is elected President by the MRC. a 10 -- . DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 27 Aug 1964 MRC Disbands After ten days of political turmoil and demonstrations, Khanh withdraws the constitution, the MRC names Khanh, Minh and Khiem to rule provisionally and disbands itself. 4 Sep 1964 Khanh Resumes Premiership Khanh returns from Dalat and ends the crisis by resuming the Premiership. 6 Sep 1964 Habassy Saigon Msg 763 Taylor cables an assessment that "...at best the emerging governmental structure might be capable of maintaining a holding operation against the Viet Cong." 7 Sep 1964 washington Conference Taylor meets with the President and the NSC Principals and decisions are made to resume DE SOTO operations, resume 34A operations, and prepare for further tit-for-tat reprisals. 10 Sep 1964 NSAM 314 The 7 September decisions are promul-gated. 13 Sep 1964 Abortive Phat Coup General Phat launches a coup but it is defeated by forces loyal to Khanh. This establishes the power of younger officers such as Ky and Thi. 18 Sep 1964 DE SOTO Patrol Attacked The first resumed DE SOTO patrol comes under apparent attack. To avoid future incidents, the President suspends the patrols. 26 Sep 1964 Vietnam High National Council The MRC names a High National Council of distinguished citizens to prepare a constitution. 20 Oct 1964 New Constitution Revealed The MRC presents the new constitution drafted by the High National Council. A prompt return to civilian government is promised. 1 Nov 1964 Huong Names Premier Tran Van Huong, a civilian, is named Premier after the appointment of Phan Khac Suu as Chief of State, thus returning the government to civilian control.  a-11 . DATE 1 Nov l964 3 Nov 1964 EVENT OR DOCUMENT VC Attack Bien Hoa Airport Johnson re-elected Task Force Begins Policy Review 26 Nov 19& Bundy Group Submits Three Options 30 Nov 1964 NSC Principals Modify Bundy Proposals 1 Dec 1964 President Meets with NSC and Taylor 3 Dec 1964 President Confers with Taylor DESCRIPTION The VC launch a mortar attack on the Bien Hoa airfield that kills Americans and damages aircraft. The military recommend a reprisal against the North; the President refuses. Iyndon Johnson is re-elected President with a crushing majority. At the Presidents request, W.P. Bundy heads an inter-agency Task Force for an in-depth review of US Vietnam policy and options. The work goes on through-out the month. The Bundy Task Force submits its draft conclusions to the Principals. They propose three alternative courses of action (1) continuation of current policy with no escalation and a resis-tance to negotiations; (2) a significant set of pressures against the North accompanied by vigorous efforts to start negotiations; (3) a modest campaign against the North with resistance to negotiations. The NSC Principals reject the pure form of any of the recommendations and instead substitute a two-phase recora-mendation for the President the first phase is a slight intensification of current covert activities against the North and in Laos, the second after 30 days would be a moderate campaign of air strikes against the DRw The President, in a meeting with the NSC Principals, and Taylor, who returned on 23 November, hears the latters re-.port on the grave conditions in SVN, then approves Phase I of the proposal. He gives tentative approval to Phase II but makes it contingent on improvement by the GVN. In a last meeting with Taylor, the President stresses the need to get action from the GVN before Phase II. a- 12 ,By NWD Date 201 I DATE 8 Dec 1964 EVENT OR DOCUMENT Taylor Sees Huong 14 Dec 1964 BARREL ROLL Begins 20 Dec 1964 Military Stage Purge 21 Dec 1964 Khanh Declares Support for Purge 24 Dec 1964 US Billet in Saigon Bombed 31 Dec 1964 Embassy Saigon Msg 2010 6 Jan 1965 Bundy Memo to SecState 8 Jan 1965 ROK Troops go to SVN 27 Jan 1965 McNaughton Memo to SecDef a- 13 DESCRIPTION Taylor presents the Presidents requirements to Premier Huong who promises to get new action on programs. BARREL ROLL armed reconnaissance in Daos begins as called for in Phase I of the program approved 1 December. The struggle within the MRC takes the form of a purge by the younger officers Ky and Thi. They are seeking to curb the power of the Huong Government. Khanh declares his support of the purge and opposes the US, Taylor in particular. He states he will not "carry out the policy of any foreign country." Rumors that Taylor will be declared personna non grata circulate. The VC bomb a US billet in Saigon on Christmas Eve, killing several Americans. The President disapproves mill-'tary recommendations for a reprisal against the North. Taylor recommends going ahead with the Phase II air campaign against the North in spite of the political instability and confusion in the South. He now argues that the strikes may help stabilize the situation. In a memo to the Secretary of State, Mm Bundy urges that we consider seme additional actions short of Phase II of the December plan in spite of the chaos in Saigon. It is the only possible course to save the situation. South Korea sends 2,000 military advisors to South Vietnam. In a memo to SecDef, McNaughton underscores the importance of SEA for the US and then suggests that we may have to adopt Phase II as the only way to save the current situation.DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT' DESCRIPTION 27 Jan 1965 Khanh Ousts Huong Government Khanh and the younger officers oust the civilian Huong government. Khanh nominates General Oanh to head an interim regime the next day. 7 Feb 1965 VC Mortar Attack Pleiku The VC launch a mortar attack on a US billet in Pleiku and an associated helicopter field. Many Americans are killed and helos damaged. The President, with the unanimous recommendation of his advisors, authorizes a reprisal. FLAMING DART I The reprisal strikes involve both US and VNAF planes. A second mission is flown the following day. McGeorge Bundy Memo to the President In an influential memo to the President after a fact-finding trip to Vietnam, Bundy concludes that the situation can only be righted by beginning sustained and escalating air attacks on the North a la Phase II. He had telephoned his concurrence in the FLAMING DART reprisal to the President from Vietnam. 8 Feb 1965 McNamara Memo to JCS In a memo to the JCS, McNamara requests the development of a limited bombing program against the North. The JCS later submit the "Eight-week Program." 10 Feb 1965 VC Attack Qui Nhon Thumbing their noses at the US reprisal, the VC attack a US billet in Qhi Nhon and kill 23. 11 Feb 1965 FLAMING DART II The second reprisal strikes authorized by the President attack targets in the North. 18 Feb 1965 Coup Fails, but Khanh Ousted A coup against the new Premier, Quat, fails when the Armed Forces Council intervenes. They seize the opportunity to remove Khanh and he is forced to leave the country several days later. 24 Feb 1965 ROLLING THUNDER Approved The President approves the first strikes for the ROLLING THUNDER sustained, es- calating air campaign against the DRV- 14 ---, DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 2 Mar 1965 ROLLUvG THUNDER Begins After being once postponed, the first ROLLING THUNDER strikes .take place. 6 Mar 1965 Marines to DaNang The President decides to send two US Marine Battalion Landing Teams to DaNang to take up the base security function. They arrive two days later. 14 Mar 1965 General H.K, Johnson Report After a trip to Vietnam, the Army Chief of Staff, General Johnson, recommends a 21-point program to the President. Included are increased attacks on the North and removal of restrictions on these missions. 29 Mar 1965 US Embassy Bombed Just as Ambassador Taylor is leaving for a policy conference in washington, the US Embassy in Saigon is bombed by VC terrorists with loss of life and extensive property damage. 31 Mar 1965 State Memo to the President In a 4l-point non-military recommen-dation to the President, State elabo-rates on a Taylor proposal. 1 Apr 1965 President Meets With NSC and Taylor At a meeting with Taylor and the NSC Principals, the President approves the 41-point non-military proposal, plus General Johnson's 21-point proposal. Tn addition, he decides to send two more Marine battalions and an air wing to Vietnam and to authorize an active ccenbat role for these forces. He also authorizes 18,000-20,000 more support forces. 2 Apr 1965 McCone Dissents from 1 Apr Decisions In a memo to SecState, SecDef, and Ambassador Taylor, CIA Director John McCone takes exception to the decision to give US troops a ground role. It is not justified unless we take radically stronger measures against North Vietnam. 6 Apr 1965 f NSAM 288 NSAM 288 promulgates the decisions of the 1 April meeting. 7 Apr 1965 Presidents Johns Hopkins Speech The President, in a speech at Johns Hopkins, offers unconditional talks a-15, DATE 7 Apr 1965 (Contd) EVENT OR DOCUMENT 8 Apr 1965 Pham Van Dong Announces 4 Points 15 Apr 1965 State Department Msg 2332 17 Apr 1965 Embassy Saigon Msg 3419 20 Apr 1965 Honolulu Conference DESCRIPTION with the DRV plus help in rebuilding after the war if they will cease aggression. DRV Foreign Minister, Pham Van Dong, announces his four points for a Vietnam settlanent. They are a defiant, unyielding repudiation of Johnson's offer. McGcorge Bundy informs Taylor that further increments of troops are being considered, plus use of US Army civil affairs personnel. Taylor takes angry exception to the proposal to increase troops and to introduce military civil affairs per-sonnel into the provinces. He did not think he had agreed on 1 April to a land war in Asia. In a hastily called conference, McNamara informs Taylor in detail of the new polic directions and "brings him along." An attempt is made to mollify him. a-16, IwC.l. U. S. PROGRAMS IN SOUTH VIETNAM, NOVEMBER 1963APRIL 1965 NSAM 273NSAM 288 I. NSAM-273 1. NSAM-273 -- The Aftermath of Diem NSAM 273 of 26 November 1963 came just four days after the assassi-nation of President Kennedy and less than a month after the assassination of the Ngo brothers and their replacement by the Military Revolutionary Committee (MRC). NSAM 273 was an interim, don't rock-the-boat document. Its central significance was that although the two assassinations had changed many things, U.S. policy proposed to remain substantially the same. In retrospect, it is unmistakably clear, but it was certainly not unmistakably clear at that time, that this was a period of crucial and accelerated change in the situation in South Vietnam. NSAM 273 reflected the general judgment of the situation in Vietnam that had gained official acceptance during the previous period, most recently and notably during the visit of Secretary McNamara and General Taylor to Vietnam in late September of that year. This generally sanguine appraisal had been the basis for the recom-mendation in that report to establish a program to train Vietnamese to carry out, by the end of 1965, the essential functions then performed by U.S, military personnel. by which time "it should be possible to withdraw the bulk of U.S. personnel." As an immediate gesture in this direction, the report recommended that "the Defense Department should announce in the very near future, presently prepared plans to withdraw one thousand U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963." The latter recommendation was acted upon the same day (2 October 1963) by making it part of a White House statement of U.S. Policy on Vietnam. This White House statement included the following pronouncement. Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their judgment that the major part of the US- military task can be completed by the end of 1965, although there may be a continuing requirement for a limited number of U.S. training personnel. They reported that by the end of this year the U.S. program for training Vietnamese should have progressed to the point where one thousand U.S. personnel assigned to South Vietnam can be withdrawn. 1 The visit of the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs to Saigon at the end of September was followed by the report to the President in early October and agreements reached with the President at the white House early in October following 1the Diem coup, a special meeting on Vietnam was held at CINCPAC headquarters on 20 November. Although this Honolulu meeting was marked by some concern over the administrative dislocation that had resulted from the coup of three weeks before, the tone remained one of optimism along the lines of the October 2 report to the President. Ambassador Lodge took note of what he cal 1ed the "political fragility" of the new regime, but he was on the whole optimistic, and even mentioned that the statement on U.S. military withdrawal was having a continued "tonic" effect on the Republic of Vietnam (RVN). General Harkins in his report mentioned a sharp increase in Viet Cong (VC) incidents right after the coup, but added that these had dropped to normal within a week, and that there had, moreover, been compensating events such as additional Montagnards coming out of the hills to get government protection. All in all there was some uneasiness, perhaps, about unknown effects of the coup, but nothing was said to suggest that any serious departure was contemplated from the generally optimistic official outlook of late September and early October. And so, with reference to the statements of October 2, NSAM 273 repeated The objectives of the United States with respect to the withdrawal of U.S. military personnel remain as stated in the White House statement of October 2, 1963. 2 Before examining further the background of NSAM 273 especially the appraisals of the Vietnam situation that it reflected -- it is well to review some of the main provisions of that policy statement of 26 November 1963. NASM 273 was not comprehensive, as the McNamara-Taylor report of 2 October (discussed below) had been, nor as NSAM 288 was later to be. Mainly it served to indicate continuance by the new President of policies already agreed upon, and to demonstrate full support by the United States of the new government of Vietnam (GVN). Both military and economic programs, it was emphasized, should be maintained at levels as high as those in the time of the Diem regime. In addition, there was an unusual Presidential exhortation -- reflect-ing the internal U.S. dispute over policy concerning Diem and Nhu that had made embarrassing headlines in October that The President expects that all senior officers of the government will move energetically to insure the full unity of support for established U.S. policy in South Vietnam. Both in Washington and in the field, it is essential that the govern, ment be unified. It is of particular importance that express or implied criticism of officers of other branches be assiduously avoided in all contacts with the Vietnamese government and with the press. 3 2 . NSAM 273 was specifically programatic so far as SVN was concerned only in directing priority of effort to the Delta. (5) Ue should concentrate our efforts, and insofar as possible we should persuade the government of South Vietnam to concentrate its effort, on the critical, situation in the Mekong Delta. This concentration should include not only military but political, economic, social, educational and infor-mational effort. We should seek to turn the tide not only of battle but of belief, and we should seek to increase not only the controlled hamlets but the productivity of this area, especially where the proceeds can be held for the advantage of anti-Communist forces. 4 In general, the policies expressed by NSAM 273 were responsive to the older philosophy of our intervention there, which was that the central function of the U.S. effort was to help the South Vietnamese to help themselves because only if they did the major job themselves could that job in reality be done at all. we would assist stabilization of the new regime and head it in that direction. (3) It is a major interest of the United States govern-ment that the present provisional government of South Vietnam should be assisted in consolidating itself in holding and developing increased public support. 5 Definition of the central task in South Vietnam as that of winning the hearts and minds of the people and of gaining for the GVN the support of the people had been the central consideration in the late summer and early fall of what to do about Diem and Nhu. The argument concern5 ng the Diem government centered on the concept that the struggle in South Vietnam could not be won without the support of the South Vietnamese people and that under the Diem regime especially because of the growing power and dominance of Nhu -- the essential popular base was beyond reach. In the 2 October report to the President as well as in the discussions later at Honolulu on 20 November this theme was prominent. The U.S. could not win the struggle, only the Vietnamese could do that. For instance, in the report to the President of 2 October, there were these words in the section on "the U.S. military advisory and support effort." We may all be proud of the effectiveness of the U.S. military advisory and support. With few exceptions, U.S. military advisors report excellent relations with their Vietnamese counterparts, whom they charac-terize as proud and willing soldiers. The stiffening and exemplary effect of U.S. behavior and attitudes 3 .  has had an impact which is not confined to the tzar effort, but which extends deeply into the whole Vietnamese way of doing things. The U.S, advisory effort, however, cannot assure ultimate success. This is a Vietnamese war and the country and the war must in the end be run solely by the Vietnamese. It will impair their independence and development of their initiative if we leave our advisors in place beyond the time they are really needed... 6 emphasis supplied Policy concerning aid to the Vietnamese may be considered to range between two polar extremes. One extreme would be our doing almost everything difficult for the Vietnamese, and the other would consist of limiting our own actions to provision of no more than material aid and advice while leaving everything important to be done by the Vietnamese themselves. Choice of a policy at any point on this continuum reflects a judgment concerning the basic nature of the problem; i.e. to what extent political and to what extent military; to what extent reasonable by political means and to what extent resolvable by military means even by outsiders. But in this case the choice of policy also reflected confidence that success was being achieved by the kind and level of effort that had already been devoted to this venture. The policy of NSAM 273 was predicated on such confidence. It constituted by its reference to the 2 October statement an explicit anticipation, with tentative time phases expressly stated, of the assumption by the Vietnamese of direct responsibility for. doing all the important things themselves sometime in 1965, the U.S. thereafter providing only material aid and nonparticipating advice at the end of that period. That optimism was explicit in the report to the President of 2 October wherein the conclusion of the section on "The US Military Advisory and Support Effort consisted of this paragraph Acknowledging the progress achieved to date, there still remains the question of when the final victory can be obtained. If, by victory, we mean the reduction of the insurgency to something little more than sporadic banditry in outlying districts, it is the view of the vast majority of military commanders consulted that success may be achieved in the I, II, and III Corps area by the end of CY 1964. Victory in IV Corps will take longerat least well into 1965. These estimates assume tha.t the political situati on does not significantly impede the effort. 7 emphasis supplied 2. First Reappraisals of the Situation in South Vietnam The caveat given expression in the last sentence of the conclusions cited above offered an escape clause, but it was clearly 4, not employed as a basis for planning and for programming. It was not emphasized, and the lack of emphasis was consistent with the general tone of optimism in the report as a whole. This general optimism in fact reflected the judgments proferred by most of the senior officials upon whom the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs had principally relied for advice. It is obvious, however, that the optimT run was scarcely consistent with the grave apprehension with which the political situation was viewed at the time. Ever since the Buddhist crisis began in early summer, the fear had been felt at the highest U.S. policy levels that the explosiveness and instability of the political situation in Vietnam might undermine completely our efforts there. This apprehension had been the reason why the President first dispatched the Mendenhall-Krulak mission to Vietnam in early September, and then, a fortnight later, sent the McNamara-Taylor mission. The political crisis existing in Vietnam was indeed a subject of great concern at the very time of the latter visit. During this visit a decision was made that a proposed Presidential letter of remonstrance to Diem for his repressive policies concerning the Buddhists was tactically unwise and that, instead, a letter over the signature of the Joint Chiefs, ostensibly directed primarily to the military situation, should be delivered to Diem carrying a somewhat modified expression of protest. That letter dated October 1 was delivered to Diem on October 2 and in eluded these judgments Now, as Secretary McNamara has told you, a serious doubt hangs over our hopes for the future. Can we win together in the face of the reaction to the measures taken by your government against the Buddhists and the students? As a military man I would say that we can win provided there are no further political setbacks. The military indicators are still generally favorable and can be made more so by actions readily within the power of your government. If you allow me, I would mention a few of the military actions which I believe necessary for this improvement. 8 And, in closing the letter the CJCS expressed himself in these words In closing, Mr. President, may I give you my most important overall impression? Up to now the battle against the Viet Cong had seemed endless; no one has been willing to set a date for its successful conclusion. After talking to scores of officers, Vietnamese and American, I am convinced that the Viet Cong insurgency in the North and Center canbe reduced to little more than sporadic incidents by the end of 1964. The Delta will take longer but should be completed by the end of 1965. But for these predictions to be valid, certain conditions must be met. Your government should be prepared to energize all agencies, military and civil, to a higher output of activity than up to now. Ineffective commanders and province officials must be replaced as soon as identified. Finally, there should be a restoration of domestic tranquility on the homefront if political tensions are to be allayed and external criticism is to abate. Conditions are needed for the creation of an atmosphere conducive to an effective campaign directed at the objectives, vital to both of us, of defeating the Viet Cong and of restoring peace to your country. 9- This letter was a policy instrument, of course, rather than exclus-ively an expression of an appraisal. As a matter of tactics it was softened considerably from the first proposed letter which was to say that the United States would consider disassociating itself from the Vietnam Government and discontinue support unless the GVI'T altered its repressive policies. It is cited here mainly to indicate the concern, made explicit by the senior members of the U.S. Mission in late September, concerning the possible effect upon military effec-tiveness of the political unrest. About a week later, in testimony before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Secretary McNamara, repeated the theme that the military situation was good,- that the political situation was bad, that the political situation could have a bad affect on the military situation, but it had not had such a bad effect yet. Follovzing an appraisal of the military situation by Gen. Taylor, Chairman Morgan asked the SecDef "Mr. Secretary, then you feel and I am sure the General feels, that the military effort is going very well?" To this the SecDefs response was Secretary McNamara. Yes we do. I think Gen. Taylor has emphasized and I would like to emphasize again, that while we believe the serious political unrest has not to date seriously and adversely affected the military effort, it may do so in the future, if it continues. Chairman Mcrgan. General, or Mr. Secretary, could we say that the military situation is moving well, but the political situation is notthe political situation is bad? Secretary McNamara. Yes, I think that is a fair summary. Chairman Morgan. Mr. Secretary, then, from your observations, both you and the General, f,rom the 8 days you spent in the 6, country, you cant see any deterioration in the military effort of SVN because of the political situation in the country? Secretary McNamara. This is a fair statementChairman Morgan. You feel that the Vietnamese Army is moving ahead and is cooperating with our forces in there? Secretary McNamara. Yes. Certain of the affairs of the Vietnamese Army have been affected by the political unrest of recent months. As Gen. Taylor pointed out, some of their relatives have been arrested and subjected to a violation of their personal freedoms and liberties, and undoubtedly this has tended to turn some of the officers away from sup-port of their government. But they are strongly motivated by the desire to resist the Communist encroachment... and their anti-Communist feelings are stronger than their distrust of government. So to date there has been no reduction in the effectiveness of their military operations, iq There is no record that this express recognition that the bad political situation might affect the military capability was considered a contingency to be foreseen in the program, or that anyone suggested it should be. Nearly four months later Secretary McNamara had an explanation to offer concerning his view of the situation at the time of this testimony. Appearing once more in Executive Session to testify on the authorization bill for the fiscal year 1965, before the House Committee on Armed Services on 27 January 1964, the Secretary was asked by Mr. Chamberman of the House Committee to explain why his press conference comments on the situation the day before were clearly more optimistic than those in his Congressional statement. Both were more optimistic than recent news reports from Viet Nam. 11 In response, the Secretary went back to his Joint Report to the President of 2 October, to cite again the caveat which had been expressed as follows.,The political situation in South Viet Nam remains deeply serious. The United States has made clear its continuing opposition to any repressive actions in South Viet Nam. While such actions have not yet significantly affected the military effort, they could do so in the future. 12 7, In further amplification of this point the Secretary almost claimed, in effect, to have foreseen and to have forecast the degradation of capability that it was then clear (in January 1964) had occurred and,had,in fact continued ever since November. These were his words, Ue didnt say--but I think you could have predicted that what we had in mind was that (1) either Diem would continue his repressive measures and remain in power, in which case he would continue to lose public support and, since that is the foundation of successful counter guerilla operations, the military operations would be adversely affected, or (2) alternatively he would continue his repressive measures and build so much resistance that he would be thrown out, then a coup would take place, and during the period of reorganization following... there would be instability and uncertainty and ml 3 itary operations would be adversely affected. 13 No fully persuasive explanation has been discovered of the apparent discrepancy between this foresight concerning the possible ill affects of "polietical instability' and the generally optimistic prognosis and the program based upon that optimism. The Secretary had had no enthusiasm for the coup. Possibly he adjusted, though reluc-tantly, to the idea and decided that the political difficulties would either be overcome by means he did not feel it was his duty to explore, or would not be serious or lasting enough to be critical. However, all of the thinking then in vogue about counterinsurgency insisted. that favorable political circumstances were essential to success. Therefore, unless it was assumed that favorable political circumstances could be brought about, the counterinsurgency effort .was bound to fail. So long as the adverse case was not proved one had to assume ultimately favorable political conditions because it was unthinkable to stop trying. Even before NSAM. 273 was adopted, evidence began to accumulate that the optimistic assumptions underlying it were suspect. First, there was unmistakable and accumulating evidence that, in the period immediately after the coup, the situation had deteriorated in many places as a direct result of the coup. Then came increasing expres-sion, df a judgment that this deterioration was not merely an immediate and short lived phenomenon, but something, rather, that continued well after the worst administrative confusions immediately after the coup had been reduced. Finally, the impression, developed in many quarters, and eventually spread to all, that before the coup, the situation had been much more adverse than we had recognized officially at the time. Before the end of December, we decided to institute a system of covert checks' on the accuracy of our basic intelligence --a large part of which came from Vietnamese sources. (There was suspicion that the interests of these officials was often 8 . served by reporting to us or to their superiors tri.thin the GVN what we or the GVN high officials wanted to hear.) As December and 'January and February passed, the situation reports trended consist-ently downward, the accumulating evidence seemed to indicate quite clearly that appreciation of setbacks and of adverse developments was regularly belated. The result was that programs tended commonly to be premised upon a more optimistic appraisal of the situation than was valid for the time when they were adopted, whether or not they were valid for an earlier period. Judgments of the trend of events in Vietnam and of the progress of our program had long been a subject of controversy, both public and within the councils of government. That there had been an under-current of pessimism concerning the situation in Vietnam was no secret to the responsible officials who visited Vietnam in September and who reported to the President on 2 October, or to the larger group that convened at CINCPAC HQ on 20 November. Most of the quali-fications in their minds related to imponderables of the political situation, which it was always hoped and assumed would be successfully resolved. The focus of the disagreement had generally been the policies of Diem and Nhu especially with respect to the Buddhists. During the summer of 1963, disagreement over the state of affairs in Vietnam had not only been aired in closed official councils, but had flared into open controversy in the public press in a manner that seemed to many to be detrimental to the U.S. It was possible to get directly conflicting views from the experts. One of the better known illustrations of this bewildering diversity of opinions among those with some claim to know is the instance recounted by both Schlesinger and Hilsman of the reports to President Kennedy on 10 September 1963 by General Victor. Krulak and Mr. Joseph A. Mendenhall upon their return from their special mission to Vietnam. General Krulak was a specialist in counterinsurgency and Mr. Mendenhal1 had, not long before, completed a tour of duty in Saigon as Deputy Chief of Mission under Ambassador Durbrow. After hearing them both out (with Krulak painting the rosy picture and Mendenhall the gloomy one), the President, in the words of the Hilsman account, "looked quizzically from one to the other. You two did visit the same country, didn't you?"14 Much of the disagreement concerning the progress of the anti-Viet Cong effort during the middle of 1963 was related intimately to issues posed by the Buddhist revolt. Where there was pessimism or scepticism about the progress of the war in general or the success of the pacifica-tion program, the attitude was generally associated with the judgment that Diem and Nhu were not administering affairs right and were alienating rather than winning the support of the masses of South Vietnamese people. Aside from Diem and Nhu and the Buddhist revolt, the major center of controversy was the situation in the Delta. The fact that NSAM 273 called for priority effort in the Delta reflected official recognition that the situation in the Delta demanded it. The ground work for this was laid during the McNamara-Taylor visit, but recognition of the serious problem there had come slowly and not without controversy. 9 . A public controversy on the subject was touched ofi by an article filed in Saigon on 15 August 1963 by David Halberstam of the New York Times. The Halberstam article said that the RVN military situation in the Delta had deteriorated seriously over the past year, and was getting increasingly worse. The VC had been increasing greatly in number, were in possession of more and bet tel aims and had larger stores of them, and their boldness to operate in large units -- up to 600 or even 1,000 men had become marked. The VC weapon losses were down, and the GVN weapon losses were up. U.S. military men and civilian officials in the field, according to this article, were reported to be very apprehensive of the effect of all this upon the Strategic Hamlet Program, and the whole future of GVN control in the Delta was in doubt. But, it was hinted strongly, higher echelon authorities were unwilling to perceive the dangers. "Some long-time observers are comparing official American optimism about the Delta to the French optimism that preceded Frances route from Indochina in 1954. They warn of "high-level self-deception. The official refutation of the Halberstam article, prepared for the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs by SACSA, categorically denied everything. Based upon what it termed "the most reliable and accurate data available from both classified and unclassified sources" the analysis showed, in the language oi its summary, that "the military situation is improving throughout the Republic of Vietnam, not as rapidly in the Mekong Delta as in the North, but improving markedly none the less. The picture ip precisely the opposite of the one painted by Mr. Halberstam. 15 In ihe body of the refutation, 13 of the principle charges in the Halberstam article were analyzed, one-by-one, and battered by an.array o. percentages, statistics presented both tabularly and in graphs, and all of the numbers were very impressive and persuasive if taken at face value. They showed, for instance, that the VC armed attacks and VC initiated incidents (not armed), in mid-summer 1963 were below the 1962 average, that the average net weekly loss of GVN weapons to che VC had fallen from 62 in 1961 to 12 in 1962 to only 6 of 1963, and that the rate of both company-sized and battalron-sized VN attacks had fallen markedly, in 1963 from the 1962 level. Generalizations about how the different groups, agencies, and echelons sided on the issue of the Vietnam situation tend to over-simplify because however they are made, there are exceptions. Mose of the senior officers in-field in the direct line of operational responsibility tended to accept the more optimistic interpretation. Examples in this category would include CINCPAC (Admiral Felt), COMUSMACV (General Harkins), Ambassador Nolting (who was soon to be replaced, however, by Ambassador Lodge, who tended to be less optimistic), and CIA Station Chief Richardson. Nolting and Richardson had been charged to develop a close and friendly relationship with Diem, and this involved necessarily a special sort of sympathy ior his outlook. The lives of most senior officers charged with operating responsibility have been pointed to giving leadership in situations 10 . of stress. This leadership includes setting an example of high morale, by their own conduct, to encourage enthusiastic esprit de corps among subordinates, and to project an unfailing image of confidence to the outside world. Such men are likely to find it almost impossible to recognize and to acknowledge existence of a situation seriously adverse to their assigned mission. It is contrary to their lifetime training never to be daunted. This characteristic makes them good leaders for difficult missions but it does not especially qualify them for rendering dispassionate judgements of the feasibility of missions or of the progress they are making. Admiral Felt and General Harkins in the field, and General Krulak in Washington, appear to have been more the gung ho type of leaders of men in combat situations than the cautious reflective weighers of complex circumstances and feasibilities, including political c ompli cations. Officials and agencies in washington who depended directly or pri-' marily upon these officers for an understanding of the situation tended, very naturally, to put their greatest faith in the judgement of those in the field who were administratively responsible and who had access to the most comprehensive official reports and data. If there were disadvantages in the position of these people, a major one was that most of their information was supplied by GVN officials, who often had a vested interest in making things look good. Moreover, the U.S. officials in positions of operational responsibility had a professional commitment to programs which, often, they had had a hand in establishing. This normally inhibited them from giving the worst interpretation to evidence that was incomplete, ambiguous or inconclusive -- and most evidence was one or more of these. Moreover, the public relations aspects of most positions of operating responsibility make it seem necessary to put a good face on things as a part of that operating responsibility. The morale of the organization seems to demand it. Finally, the intelligence provided on an official basis generally followed formats devised for uniform formal compilation and standard statistical treatment. All along the line, lower echelons were judged, rewarded or penalized by higher echelons in terms of the progress revealed by the reports they turned in. This practice encouraged and facilitated feeding unjustifiably optimistic data into the reporting machinery.The darker view was easier for those who lacked career commitment to the success of the programs in the form in which they had been adopted. The more pessimistic interpretations were generally based, also, upon sources of information which were intimate, personal, out-of -channels, and with non-official personages. They were particular-istic rather than comprehensive, intimate and intuitive rather than formal, impressionistic rather than statistical.'Moreover, some of the principal Cassandras were newsmen whose stories, whether correct or incorrect, made the front page and sometimes even the headlines. This suggested a vested interest in what for one reason or another was sensational. Other Cassandras were military advisors of junior grades, or lesser USOM officers especially those in the provinces, whose views were .easy to discount by senior '1;L -- . Section 3 3   officials because, however familiar the junior officers might be with local acts or particular details, they generally lacked knowledge of the overall picture. There was unquestionable ambivalence in U.S. official attitudes concerning progress and prospects. Despite the repeatedly expressed qualifications concerning the potentially grave affect of the political instability in Vietnam, the programming and policy formulation, as already noted, was -without qualification based on optimistic assumptions. In an over-view of the Vietnam War (1960-1963) prepared by SACSA and delivered to the Secretary shortly after his return from South Vietnam, the missions assessment of mi litary progress was summarized in these terms The evidences of overall military progress were so unmistakably clear that the mission, acknowledging the implications and uncertainties of the power crisis underway in Vietnam, concluded that the GVN military effort had achieved a momentum of progress which held further promise of ultimate victory over the Viet Cong; further, that victory was possible within reasonable limits of time and investment of U.S. resources. 16 The high priority of the Delta problem was recognized, in this same over-view, with the statement that "the mission was impressed with the evidence that the decisive conflict of the war was approaching in the Mekong Delta." The major difficulty there was identified somewhat euphemistically as due to the fact that "the mission found evidences that the Government of Vietnam had overextended its hamlet construction program in these southern provinces." 17 Not long before this, however, Michael Forrestal in the White House had sent to Secretary McNamara a copy of a Second Informal Appreciation of the Status of the Strategic Hamlet Program dated 1 September 19o3, and prepared by USOM Regional Affairs officers. This Appreciation gave province by province summaries that were far from encouraging concerning the Delta. In addition to Long An and Dinh Tuong provinces which were the worst, it was said of Kien Tuong that the program continues to be slow...few hamlets are completed and a fraction of planned militia trained...the one bright spot... remains the Pri Phap area, which is, however, vulnerable mili-tarily should the VC decide to concentrate their efforts against it. The Chief of Province...we feel is totally unqualified. Vir l Binh, although the hamlet program continued to increase in numbers...the security situation deteriorated in July and August. The removal of a recently intro-duced RVN battalion damaged the effort, and a change in leadership dislocated projects underway...Nhi Long has been severely threatened in August, the route to Vinh Long is again insecure...else-where the hamlet program appears to be over-extended and with insufficient troop support is under serious threat in former VC strongholds. Security in southernmost Long Toan District, the province VC haven, continues to be very poor... Major Thao, an extremely competent leader,...was replaced in late July... Vinh Long Although most signs indicate progress... evaluation of Vinh Long remains largely an evalua-tion of Lt. Col. Phuoc, Chief of Province...whose idea had previously led him to construct through corvee labor kilometer after kilometer of useless walls, and whose insensitivity to the population had led to considerable popular antipathy. An apparent change of attitude has taken place... and Phuoc now says that the strategic hamlet is a state of mind rather than a .fortification. Phuocs sin-cerity and commitment to the program are still prob-lematical, however, as is public acceptance of him and of the program...some pessimists feel that this may well prove...the most difficult province in the Delta to pacify. Chuong Thien The Communists still control most of the people and land in Chuong Thien..the new province chief...has been evasive and has shewn no desire really to cooperate...the large relocation effort...risks loss of the province to the VC because the people involved have been alienated. Ba Xuyen Shortcoming in the implementation of the hamlet program, as well as a lack of confi-dence in the province chief...led to the recall in late August of the USOM provincial representative and possible unofficial suspension of USOM...in an effort to build statistics, the province had con-structed a number of vulnerable and non-viable hamlets. There has been a forced wholesale reloca-tion, insufficiently justified, poorly financed... numerous occurrences have convinced us that there is venality...and lack of good faith. A new province chief (not presently in prospect) might permit prog-ress in this rich and important area...a major effort to gain popular support for government is needed in this as in many other Delta provinces. An Xuyen The province remains under VC control with the exception of a handful of widely separated govern-ment strong points... An Xuyen,comprising much of the enemys main Delta power center, is a primary-source of men, money and supplies for the Communists. 13 . The strategic hamlet program has not succeeded. Under present conditions, given the scarcity of GVN forces and deeply entrenched Viet Cong shadow government, it can not be expected to... 18 Whether or not the full seriousness of the situation in the Delta was appreciated at the time of the McNamara-Taylor mission in September 1963, it is entirely clear that the Delta was recognized as a high priority problem. The recommendations set forth in their joint Report to the President of 2 October called for "the training and arming of hamlet militia at an accelerated rate, especially in the Delta" and for "a consolidation of the Strategic Hamlet Program, especially in the Delta, and action to insure that in the future strategic hamlets are not built until they can be protected and until civic action programs can be introduced." And in the appraisal of overall progress, the judgments were rendered that The Delta remains the toughest area of all, and now requires top priority in both GVIT and U.S. efforts. Approximately 40 percent of the people live there; the area is rich and has traditionally resisted central authority; it is the center of Viet Cong strength over one-third of the "hard-core" are found there and the maritime nature of the terrain renders it much the most difficult region to pacify. 19 During the Honolulu meeting of 20 November when Gen. Harkins presented a summary of the situation in 13 critical provinces, 7 were in the Delta. Secretary McNamara in a detailed discussion on that occasion of the situation on these provinces suggested that there were three things to be done in the Delta (1) to get the Chieu Hoi program moving; (2) to get the fertilizer program going in order to increase the output of rice, and (3) most important, to improve the security of strategic hamlets by arming and training ; nd increasing the numbers of the militia. It is recorded that at this point General Taylor made a suggestion that perhaps we needed joint U.S.-Vietnamese province teams to attack problems at the province level because the problems were in fact different in each province. This latter seems worth noting in view of the emphasis that was to be placed, some months later, upon getting more Americans into a supervisory or advisory capacity in the provincial areas. when General Harkins presented his review of the military situa-tion at this meeting, he indicated that weapon losses were quite high, particularly in November when the government forces lost nearly 3 weapons to every one captured from the VC. The losses were incurred largely by the Civil Guard, the Self-Defense Corps and the hamlet militia. It was also indicated at the meeting that the greatest single difficulty of a pacification program was in the problem of security in the hamlets. Nevertheless, the explanation that the difficulties of November resulted solely from the coup and (would therefore not continue) made it seem unnecessary to change the assumptions that over-all progress in the counter-insurgency effort justified programming a phase-out of the major portion of the U.S. 14 ,By NWD Date 201 I contribution. The assumptions were retained that (1) the Communistinsurgency would be brought under control in the Northern two-thirds of the country by the end of calendar year 64, the phase down of the RVNAF could be started at the beginning of calendar year 1965 (instead of the previous estimate of calendar year 166); and this resulted in a reduction from previous estimates of funding for the RVNAF (excluding para-military and police) as follows (in millions of dollars) Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year 65 Fiscal year Fiscal year 69 225.2213.3 225.5197.4 143.5131.2 122.7H9.7 121.9119.5 00, While those from Washington who were attending the conference at Honolulu, and Ambassador Lodge, were returning to Washington, President Kennedy was assassinated. The following day, on.23 November, a memo-randutn was prepared to guide the new President for his meeting with Ambassador Lodge. The main points of this guidance stressed the need for teamwork tri thin this U.S. mission. It is absolutely vital that the whole of the country team, and particularly Ambassador Lodge and General Harkins, work in close harmony and with full consultation, back-and-forth. There must be no backbiting or sniping at low levels such as may have contributed to recent news stories about General Harkins being out of favor with the new regime... 21 3. First Actions on NSAM 273 and First Misgivings In response to the call for priority of effort to turn the tide in the Delta, an additional ARVN division was shifted to the Delta, and directives were issued to COMUSMACV to effect an increase in military tempo there, especially to improve tactics, to maintain full strength in combat elements, in arming and training hamlet militia. Along with this, he was to consolidate strategic hamlet programs to bring the pace of construction to a level consistent with GVN capabilities both to provide essential protection and to introduce civic action programs. AID actions to increase production in the Delta were also initiated and acceleratedfertilizer, pesticides, rice seed, the hamlet school program and hamlet medics, generators and radio sets, etc. USOM had, further, conveyed to the GVN its assurance that, subject to Congressional appropriations, the U.S. fully intended to maintain the level of aid previously given to the Diem Government22 '' Scarcely more than a week after the formalization of NSAM 273 on.26 November 1963, the adverse trend of events that previously had been only rumored or feared moved much closer to being acknowledged to be an unmistakable and inescapable reality. On 7 December (Saigon 15, time), Ambassador Lodge forwarded a report of USOM provincial repre-sentative Young on the situation in Long An province as of 6 December. Part of that report was as follows (1) The only progress made in Long An province dur-ing the month of November, 1963 has been by the Communist Viet Cong. The past thirty days have produced a day-by-day elimination of USVietnamese sponsored strategic hamlets and the marked increase in Viet Cong influence, military operations, physical control of the countryside and Communist controlled combat hamlets. (2) At the end of September, 1963 province officials stated that 219 strategic hamlets were completed and met the 6 criteria. Effective 30 November 1963 this figure has been reduced to about 45 on the best estimates of MAAG, USOM and new province chief, Major Dao. Twenty-seven hamlets were attacked in November compared with a figure of 77 for June. This would appear to be an improvement. However, the explanation is a simple one so many strategic hamlets have been rendered ineffective by the Viet Cong that only 27 were worth attacking this month... (4) The reason for this unhappy situation is the failure of the government of Vietnam to support and protect the hamlets. The concept of the strategic hamlet called for a self-defense corps capable of holding off enemy attack for a brief period until regular forces (ARVN, Civil Guard, or SDC) could come to the rescue. In hamlet after hamlet this assist-ance never came, or in most cases, arrived the fol-, lowing morning during daylight hours... (5) Two explanations are presented for the lack of assist-ance (a) there are not sufficient troops to protect key installations and district headquarters and at the same time go to the assistance of the hamlet, (b) Both official orders and policy prohibit the movement of troops after dark to go to the assistance of hamlets or isolated military posts... (9) The strategic hamlet program in this province can be made workable and very effective against the Viet Cong. But help must come immediately in the form of additional troops and new concepts of operation, not in the same reheated French tactics of 1954, beefed up tri th more helicopters and tanks. The hamlets must be defended if this province is not to fall under complete control of the Viet C.ong in the next few mortths...(11) See also General Dons statement to me on Long An, notably his statement that totally useless and impractical hamlets were built with forced labor so that grafters would receive the money allocated to strategic hamlets... (12) I am asking MACV and USOM to find out how the above and the scandalous conditions described by General Don escaped inspection. 23 This report on Long An province reached Washington about the same time that a Cabinet level meeting at the Department of State was being held to review the situation in Vietnam and discuss possible further actions. A briefing on the situation was presented, on behalf of the Defense Department and the Secretary, by General Krulak. General Krulak's briefing included the following conclusions a. The new GVN shows a desire to respond to U.S. advice and improve its military effectiveness and has the capability to do so. Its plans are basically sound but it is in a state of organizational turmoil which cannot fail to affect its capabilities ad-ver sely for the short term. b. The VC are making an intensive although loosely coordinated effort to increase their hold on the countryside while the new government is shaking down. c. The VC have exhibited a powerful military capa-bility for at least a brief period of intensified operations and their skill at least in counter air-borne operations is improving. d. There is ground for concern that infiltration of materiel support has increased in the Delta area but there is little hard proof This is a prime intelligence deficiency since it affects not only the military tactics but our overall Southeast Asia strategy. 24 The prevailing view at this time seems to have been more apprehensive than Gen. Krulaks briefing would suggest. It was immediately decided that the Secretary should have another look at the situation by return-ing from the December NATO meeting via Saigon. The Backup Book for the Secretary of Defenses Saigon trip of 18-20 December contains indications of the major questions that he proposed to look into during his brief projected visit to Vietnam. The Young Report on Long An Province as of 6 December had evidently made a strong impression, and it seems the Secretary was especially anxious to safeguard 17 . against being misled in the future about the status of programs. With respect to the Strategic Hamlet Program generally, it is evident that there was apprehension concerning the questionable statistics that had been used in the Diem regime's portrayal of the program. It washoped that it would be possible to identify the requirements for a program of on-going current assessments of the program as quickly as possible. There was also an intention to publish an appropriate set of new guidelines for the coordination of construction, civic action and mili-tary programs, and, perhaps more important, to accomplish the consolidation and correction of ham!et programs in the shortest possible time. Five problem areas with respect to the strategic hamlet program were identified prior to the trip, these were a. What progress is being achieved by the surveys and when will the reports be available? b. what specific actions were then underway to coordinate the companion military, political and social programs? c. When would the new guidelines be published? d. What action was underway to indoctrinate the newly assigned province officials to enable them to pursue the program effectively? I-s e. Was it plain that one big problem would be to insure that the province and district officials understood and executed vigorously their revised programs? Had any thought been given to adding an additional advisor or two, in the critical prov-inces, to work at the district level and to insure that the officials actually drove programs forward. 25 A point to be noted in these is the growing idea of placing an increasing number of advisors at the province and district level. The Secretary made certain decisions of an immediate nature con-cerning programs in Vietnam while he was still in Saigon; and irnme-diately upon his return he made his report to the President in which he described the situation as he had found it, and made further recommenda-tions that he had evidently not felt empowered toeiact without Presiden-tial approval. Among the actions agreed upon during the visit to Saigon on 19-20 December were the following 1. The GVN should be pressed to increase troop density in six provinces in III Corps by about 100 (ten infantry and three engineering batallions), in 18, accordance with plans discussed at a meeting with COMUSMACV and the Ambassador. 2. Revise the pacification plans for critical provinces to insure that they reflect scheduling and programming "based on a realistic appraisal of the actual status of the hamlets, the SDC and Civil Guard and ARVN as well as the rehabilitation mate-rials available." 3. Increase U.S. military advisory strength in the thirteen critical provinces (agreed to be critical at Honolulu) in accordance with a table submitted by COMUSMACw 4. Reinforce USOM representation in thirteen critical provinces starting with Long An in accordance with a proposal from USOM Saigon. 5. Provide unifoims for the SDC with priority on the Delta area. 6. Press the GVN for a clear statement, in form of orders to province chiefs, for continuance and reshaping of the hamlet program. 7- Press the GVN to provide for a Joint General Staff (JCS) chief, and for a HI Corp3 commander with no other responsibilities. 8. Continue to stress to the GVN the need for forceful central leadership and effective and visible popular leadership. 26 The Secretarys report for the President dated 21 December '63 was gloomy and expressed fear that the situation had been deteriorating long before any deterioration had been suspected (officially). The report began by saying that the situation was "very disturbing," and that unless current trends were reversed within two or three months they would "lead to neutralization at best and more likely to a Commu-nist-controlled state." The new government of Big Minh was identified as the greatest source of concern because it seemed indecisive and drifting. There seemed to be a clear lack of administrative talent and of political experience. While on the other hand generals who should have been directing military affairs were preoccupied with political matters i.e., working to assure or to-increase their own political ppwer within the RMC. A second major weakness seemed to the Secretary to be the Country Team. He felt that it lacked leadership and had been "poorly informed" and was 'hot working according to a common plan." He had found as an 19, example of confusion conflicts between USOM and military recommendations, in cases of recommendations to the government of Vietnam and washington concerning the size of the military budget. "Above all, Lodge has virtually no official contact with Harkins." The Ambassador, the Secretary felt, simply could not conduct a coordinated administration-- not because he did not wish to, but because he had "operated as a loner all his life and cannot readily change now." Concerning enemy progress, the report said Viet Cong progress has been great during the period since the coup, with my best guess beingthat the situation has in fact been deteriorat- ing in the countryside since July to a far greater extent than we realized because of undue dependence on distorted Vietnamese reportingt The Viet Cong now control very high proportionsof the people in certain key provinces, particu- larly those directly South and West of Saigon. 07emphasis supplied As remedial measures he recommended that the government of Vietnam be required to reallocate its military forces so that its effective strength in these key provinces would be essentially doubled. There would also have to be major increases in both the U.S. military staff and the USOM staff, to the point where the numbers of Americans assigned in the field would give the U.S. a reliable independent U.S. appraisal of the status of operations. (Tills was a clear enough indication of the Secretarys unhappiness with past reporting.) Third, he stated that a "realistic pacification plan" would have to be prepared. Specifically, they should allocate adequate time to make the remaining government controlled areas secure, and only then work from them into contiguous surrounding areas. The Secretary stressed that the situation was worst in the Delta and surrounding the capitol, and that in the North things were better, and that General Harkins remained hopeful that the latter areas could be made reasonably secure late in the year. The report expressed considerable concern over the increasing infiltration of men and equipment from North Vietnam. Various proposals to counter this infiltration had been discussed in Saigon, but the Secretary was not yet convinced that there were means that were politioally acceptable and militarily feasible of stopping that infiltration. Minh had strongly opposed any ideas of possible neutralization of Vietnam. (This was taken to dispose of proposals suggested by Senator Mansfield, President DeGaulle, the New York Times, columinist Walter Lippman and others). Concerning a possible escalation of U.S. effort, the Secretary indicated that he had directed supply of a modest increase in artillery, but, "US resources and personnel cannot usefully be substantially increased." 20 . In concluding, the Secretary said that his appraisal might be overly pessimistic, and that Lodge, Harkins and Minh, while agreeing on specific points, seemed to feel that January might bring a significant improvement. Following his report to the President, the Secretary made the following remarks to the press, at the White House ...we have just completed our report to the President...We observed the results of the very substantial increase in VC activity, an increase which began shortly after the new government was formed, and has extended over a period of several weeks. During this time, the Viet Cong have attacked and attacked successfully, a substantial, number of the strategic hamlets. The rate of that VC activity, however, has substantially dropped within the past week to ten days. This rapid expansion of activity, I think, could have been expected. It was obviously intended to take advantage of the period of organization in the new government...Ue received in great detail the plans of the South Vietnamese and the plans of our military advisors for operations during 1964. Ue have every reason to believe they will be successful. We are determined that they shall be. 28 4 Efforts To Improve Intelligence On Progress Of The War The Secretary had made evident in his memo of 21 December to the President that he had become seriously disturbed at the failure of the reporting system in Vietnam to alert him promptly to the deteriorationthe situation there. CIA Director McCone had accompanied him on the trip to Saigon and, immediately upon his return, Mr. McCone initiated efforts to improve the reporting system. On 23 December he wrote the Secretary ...information furnished to us from MACV and the Embassy concerning the current Viet Cong activities in a number of provinces and the relative position of the SVN Government versus the Viet Cong forces was incorrect, due to the fact that the field officers of the MAAG and USOM had been grossly misinformed by the province and district chiefs. It was reported to us, and I believe correctly, that the province and district chiefs felt obliged to 'create statistics which would meet the approbation of the Central Government. 21 ., I believe it is quite probable that the same practice might be repeated by the new province and district chiefs appointed by the MRC... 29 McCone, therefore, proposed development of a new, covert method of checking on the information supplied by these regular reporting author!-ties on the progress of the war and on pacification and other counter-insurgency efforts. A plan was developed within CIA by 3 January 1964 which called for the formation of a mission of 10 to 12 experienced intelligence officers, all drawn from CIA, to proceed to Saigon for a 60 to 90 day TDY beginning about 12 January. There, under the direction of the CAS Station Chief, they would undertake 1. A survey of VietnameseAmerican counter-insurgency reporting machinery; 2. Develop, assess, and recruit new covert sources of information, to serve as a check, and finally, 3. Assist the station chief in developing recom-mendations, for submission to Washington through the Saigon country team, on means of improving overall GVN and US reporting machinery. McCone forwarded these plans to McNamara on 7 January for discus-sion at a meeting that same day. 30 FoIlowing the meeting of 7 January on this original proposal, a revised proposal was drawn up and submitted by McCone to McNamara for concurrence on 9 January. 31 The revision was largely responsive to a fear of the Secretary that, as originally pro-posed, the TDY team would serve as a sort of Inspector General func-tioning independently of both the Country Team and the CAS Station Saigon. Accordingly the new draft expressly specified that a separate reporting system would not be established, nor a reorganization of the existing reporting system attempted. It would attempt, however, to develop through covert techniques a method of spot checking the accuracy of regular reporting and develop also new covert sources of information on the progress of the war. In accepting the proposal in a written reply dated 16 January, Secretary McNamara expressed insistence on malting this a team effort, first by emphasizing that "I do not believe that the team should have an inspectoral function for the overall reporting system," and second by adding to the draft submitted for his signature the clause, "but it should be a joint program involving all of the affected members of the country team." When the definitive messages went out to Saigon they had the concurrence of State, Defense and CIA. 32 It is understandable enough from an administrative point of view that a formally coordinated unified effort seemed preferable. There had been notable discords, and failures of communication, and policy disagreement within the Mission in the past and these had caused serious problems. Important sources of disagreement remained, and 22 ., anything resembling an IG inquiry might have brought about morale prob-lems that it was well to avoid. The reverse of the coin was that formalized coordination of intelligence stood the chance of stifling or concealing minority dissent. It was indeed the basic mission of the group to set up checks. But in the extent to which this system of checks were to be coordinated with. the system as a whole, it risked losing some part of its independence of the accepted view. And it had been the accepted view that had been proved wrong. By the time full agreement was reached on the terms of reference for the team, the team was already in Saigon. A month later it submit-ted a report evaluating the situation in Viet' Nam at about the same time that the CAS station chiefs submitted two other evaluations which were apparently for a time mistakenly attributed to the TDY team. These evaluations caused enough uneasiness within the country team to indicate that interpretation of intelligence and situation appraisals remained the touchy matter that the Secretary had foreseen. The "Initial Report of CAS Group Findings in SVN," dated 10 February 1964 began by acknowledging that the group activities had been temporarily disrupted by the Khanh Coup of 30 January (which will be described later), and did not attempt to report on the covert cross checks because before covert cross checks could be established it was necessary to learn the pattern andnature of the reporting system then in use, both American and Vietnamese, 55 The first appraisals, therefore, were expressly based solely on a new look at what the existing system reported. The first impression of the group was that for the most part the Vietnamese had been reporting honestly to their American counterparts since the 1 November coup and that if current reporting was indeed biased it was biased against the Diem regime. The first general impression of the situation, expressly subject to further inquiry, was that "the momentum of the strategic hamlet program has slowed practically to a halt." More specific evaluations, which focused on local situations north "and east of Saigon and took up most of this initial report, were more pessimistic than the "general impression." Within Bihh Long Province, security had deteriorated rapidly during January and the VC now controlled route 13. Well planned and viciously executed VC attacks on hamlets had caused wide fear, and produced doubt among the populace that the GVN could protect them. The former province chief and deputy chief for military operations had been replaced just two days before the Khanh coup. The response to the Khanh coup had been one of disgust. Phuoc Thanh Province, according to the province chief, was 80 controlled by the VC. The VC controlled the roads, making GVN travel impossible without large armed escorts. The VC were moving freely in battalion size units with heavy weapons throughout the prov-ijtce. COMUSMACV had reported that the one to one GVNVC ratio; in the province was misleading because many of the GVN units were tied down in static positions whereas the VC were mobile. 23, When the Special CAS group turned in its final appraisal on 18. February, Gen. Harkins was asked by the CGCS to comment. Gen. Harkins offered, 3 days later, a paragraph by paragraph commentary, much of which agreed with the CAS group findings. There were a few minor points of fact that were in disagreement. Where General Harkins pointedly disagreed was in the matter of interpretation and emphasis and where both the CAS group and Gen. Harkins agreed that past per-formance had not been good, Gen. Harkins tended to emphasize the hope, as the CAS group did not, that under Khanh the situation would perhaps improve. Beyond this, Gen. Harkins was, in general, somewhat disturbed that the CAS group might be exceeding its terms of reference by report-ing unilaterally, and misleading the national decision process by xor-warding information not coordinated and cleared with other elements o the U.S. reporting mechanism in Vietnam. Perhaps most significant o. all, at the very beginning of his comments he offered an observation that, internationally or otherwise, raised very basic issues o. the nature, function, and 1inritat5nns of the intelligence and estimation process. Except for the spectacular and eye catching lead sentence "Tide of insurgency in all our corps areas appears to be going against GVi, I have no quarrel with most of the statements con-tained in the CAS Survey Team appraisal. Where the statements are clean-cut, the supporting inioi-mation was usually provided by my field personnel and reflected in reports already sent to Washington by this headquarters. Where the statements are sweeping, they are based on opinion or an unfortunate penchant for generalizing from the specifre. My detailed comments follow and are geared to thespecific paragraphs of the CAS message. 31 feiap asis supplied, If we examine this statement with particular reference to thefoids and phrases underlined, the large, epistemological problem oi the junc-tion of intelligence and national decision-making is pointedly indicated. By "clean-cut," Gen. Harkins undoubtedly referred to phenomena that were concrete, highly specific and narrowly factual. These were the sort of phenomena about which there could seldom or never be any serious dispute. By "sweeping" statements, and by "unfortunate penchant for generalising from the specific," he was referring to the mental process of bridging, the gap from the small concrete detail which was seldom or never by it-self a basis for large decision to the interpretation 01 that detail tc ch-- judgment of the significance of that detail. Only upon the basis of interpretations (judgments) of the importance, meaning and relevance of things could policy decisions be made. And that judgment or interpretation was seldom or never inescapably inherent in the measurable, sharply defin-able, completely unarguable concrete detail. It might be derived from or directly reflect such data, but its form would be determined equally, oreven more, from the perspective in which it was viewed. And this perspective was comprised of the whole context of incompletely described, not fully identified values, and imperfectly defined priorities, that determined the weight and place given to that factual detail in the mysterious calculus of the decision-matter. If this were not the case, any bright college boy given the same set of "facts" would inevitably derive from them the same judgments of what national policy should be, as the canniest, most generally knowledgable and experienced veteran. 5 The Unrealized January Upturn and the Khanh Coup There was hope that as January 1964 wore on the situation would take a turn for the better. But, as the CAS reports cited in the foregoing section suggest, things did not get better. The hope was that the Minh regime would find itself, but before it did the Khanh coup of 30 January came as another blow to progress in the operating program and as a disillusioning surprise to the hopes for the stable political situation generally agreed to be the prerequisite to ultimate success Despite the unfavorable news which was beginning to excite the first serious proposals within the JCS for carrying the war to the north by expanded clandestine operations and finally by overt bombing the Secretary managed to maintain the earlier philosophy that the U.S. involvement would remain limited and that in fact the counterinsurgency effort could not really attain its goals unless the U.S. role continued to be limited and the South Vietnamese did the main job themselves. Just before the Khanh coup, in testimony on 27 and 29 January before the House Armed Services Committee, the Secretary encountered some sharply probing questions on the continuing costs of the war. The questions centered on -the inconclusiveness of the efforts to date and upon the apparent discrepancies between autumnal optimism and the winter discouragements, and between official optimism and the pessimistic reports appearing in newspaper stories. Even Mr. Mendel Rivers, evidently impatient that the VC had not already been subdued and perhaps suspecting that this was due to lack of vigor in our prosecution of the war,asked during these hearings if we were planning to "do anything to bring this war to the VC, any more than what we have done already..." 35 The Secretary tried to explain that "...It is a Vietnamese war. They are going to have to assume the primary responsibility for winning it. Our policy is to limit our support to logistical and training support." To this, Mr. Rivers replied with the following question "There are no plans to change the modus operandi of this war, so far as the bleeding of this country is concerned?" A little later, Representative Chamberlain asked the Secretary if he continued to be as "optimistic" about the scheduled withdrawal of U.S. personnel as he had been in October. The Secretary in reply reaffirmed that he believed that; 25, ... the war in South Vietnam trill be won primarily through the South Vietnamese efforts; it is a South Vietnamese war. It is a war of the counter guerrillas as against the guerrillas.,we are only assisting them through training and logistical support. We started the major program of assistance in training and logistical support toward the latter part of 1961. I think it is reasonable to expect that after four years of such training we should be able gradually to withdraw certain of our training personnel. Following this, Representative Stratton addressed an inquiry to the Secretary Mr. Secretary, I am a little bit worried about your statement in answer to Mr. Chamberlain, that you still contemplate continuing withdrawal of our forces from Vietnam, in line with your previously announced plan. Isn't this a little unrealistic, in view of the fact that when you first made the announcement things were going a bit better than they appear to be going at the moment? And wouldnt you say that in the event that things do not go as well as you hope they will, that unquestionably we can't continue to withdraw any more of our forces? Secretary McNamaras reply No Sir, I would not. I dont believe that we as a nation should assume the primary responsibility for the war in South Vietnam. It is a counter-guerrilla war, it is a war that can only be won by the Vietnamese themselves. Our responsibility is not to substitute ourselves for the Vietnamese, but to train them to carry on the operations that they themselves are capable of I The theme was next picked up by Representative Kohelan. He said that "One of the things that some of us are quite concerned about is this constant tendency toward a sanguine approach to the problem of Southeast Asia." He went on to recall that when he and other committee members had been out to South Vietnam in November of 1962, when General Harkins was saying the war would be won in 2 years and Admiral Felt said it would be won in 3 years although Halberstam and other newsmen were pessimistic at that time and now seemed, to Representative Kohelan, to have been right. 26 .By NWD Date 201 1 You could not.go from the airfield to Mytho without an armed guard in full daylight, or... transport anything for fear of ambush by ground, although the Vietnamese themselves could move the freight by some kind of pay-off to the Viet Cong. In response to this the Secretary said that we were in a very different position than the French had been and that in this sort of war improvement was bound to be slowa matter of years. But this did not mean we should retain all of our existing personnel in South Vietnam. It would be a waste to do so, and by "keeping the crutch there too long we would weaken the Vietnamese rather than strengthen them." within a day or two after this testimony was given there came the Khanh coup, which constituted not only another hard blow to our efforts in Vietnam but also to our confidence that we knew what was going on there. The Khanh coup of 30 January 1964 came as an almost complete surprise to the mission and to Washington. What may be considered in retrospect, but only in retrospect, as the first very general danger signal came in the form of a conversation between the USDCM in Saigon and Italian Ambassador D'Orlandi, on 20 January, and reported that same evening to washington. In discussing the current French initiative in Asia (recognition of Communist China and advocacy of neutralization of SEA), the Italian Ambassador had said that the greatest danger to the U.S. position in Southeast Asia lay in the effect it might have upon certain pro-French and potentially neutralist mambers of the MRC. when asked to clarify, DOrlandi named Generals Tran Van Don and Ton Thap Dinh as potential leaders of a group that might accept a French neutralization formula, expecially if the U.S. position on that issue were not clarified immediately. In reporting the incident the Embassy commented it had no hard evidence of either of these two flirting with neutralization, although because of French training they were frequently cited as pro-French. 36 A few days later Ambassador Lodge issued a public statement which acknowledged existence of neutralization rumors and proceeded to affirm that U.S. policy remained unchanged and that the U.S., "In solidarity trith the Government of the Republic of Vietnam, firmly rejects the spurious idea of 'neutralizing' South Vietnam since neutralization' would simply be another means of Communist take-over." 37 The first warning of the coup that may be considered specific and definite, however, did not come until 28 January, when General Khanh told Colonel Jasper Wilson, U.S. Senior MAAG advisor for I Corps, that pro-French, pro-neutralist members of the MRC--Generals Xuan, Don, and Kimwere planning a palace coup that would take place as early as 31 January. 38 Once the coup was effected, they would call for neutralization of South Vietnam. It was not reported that in the conversation with Wilson, Khanh had expressly suggested that he might try a counter coup action. He did say, however, that he planned to go to Saigon that day or on the morrow. In reporting this conversation to Lodge and Harkins in Saigon and to CIAwashington, CAS cited four other recent intelligence 27items, from other sources, which might have lent some credence to the Khanh allegations (although in the course of time Khanhs allegations were discounted almost entirely). These were (1) Tran Van Ly gained impression in conversation with Xuan that Xuan favored a coup. (2-) Lt. Col. Tran Dinh Lam, recently brought back from Paris at the request of Generals Tran Van Don and Le Van Kim, was reported to have French authorization to spend 2 billion piastres to achieve a neutralization of South Vietnam. (3) An American had observed several military trucks bringing weapons and ammunition to Xuan's police headquarters at Camp DuMare. (4) Generate Kim, Don, Nguyen Van Vy, and Duong Van Duc had been identified by Major General Le Van Nghiem as pro-French and privately in favor of neutralization. Nevertheless, Khanh's charges along with other reports were described by CAS as difficult to evaluate; and it was speculated that he and others making similar charges might be motivated by disgruntlement over failure to obtain better positions for themselves within the MRC. The next move in this sequence of events was when General Khanh talked to Ambassador Lodge in Saigon on the afternoon of 29 January. The striking thing is that although Khanh evidently made his intentions clear, the Ambassadors first thought was to protest to DeGaulle rather than to warn the GVN. That evening at 800 p.m., Ambassador Lodge filed a NODIS (Embtel 1431) suggesting that representations should be made to DeGaulle against French clandestine plotting to upset the GVN and set it thereby upon a neutralist course. 39 General Khanh had apparently made an impression on the Ambassador with his allegations of French machinations, asking for assurance that the U.S. opposed neutralization and if necessary would help him, Khanh, .get his family, then in Da Nang, out of the country. He claimed that he had the support of General Khiem of III Corps and General Tri of II Corps as well as 90 percent of the army and 70 percent of the existing government. Lodge further reported that Khanh made a special point of wanting to continue to use Colonel Jasper Wilson as his exclusive contact with the U.S. Khanh refused absolutely to deal with any other than Wilson because he had had "an unfortunate experience with a CIA representative named Spera, before the 31 October coup." Lodge went on to say that although he had no great faith in Xuan, he believed that Don and Kim were patriotic Vietnamese and "therefore, what General Khanh says about them goes against my deepest instincts." Lodge sensed the intent of a coup, but evidently did not appreciate its imminence; for although he said he expected that there would be more to report later, he decided not to alter the government of Vietnam and had confided the news from Wilson only to Harkins and DeSilva. However, it was a matter of only about seven hours after reporting this first Khanh feeler that Lodge at 315 a.m. of 30 January (Saigon tithe) advised Secretaries Rusk and McNamara that General Khanh has informed us through his contact, Colonel Jasper Wilson, MAAG advisor I Corps, that he together with General Phat and Khiem intend to move at 0400 this morning to secure changes in the composition 28 .By NWD Date 201 1 of the MRC. General Khiem states that General Minh has been informed of his move and agrees. The only definite statement we have as yet is that Premier Tho must go. 40 Over the next two or three days Ambassador Lodge altered consider-ably his first opinions about the justification for the coup. The U.S. chose to view the act as merely a change of personnel within the same MRC format; and the Ambassador's first attempt to explain the affair revealed his hope that an effort to put a good face on it might not be amiss. (There was little else he could do). Herewith my preliminary assessment of the new Government in Viet Nam. It is very much subject to change as we move along. 1. General Khanhs coup was obviously extremely disconcerting at first blush, we felt we were begin-ning to make real progress here with the Minh Govern-mentin the conduct of the effort against the Viet Cong; and in making General Minh into a popular figure. To overthrow a Government which was pro-gressing fairly satisfactorily seemed like a violent and disorderly procedure... 2. On second thought, however, one realized the Generals Don and Kim had never at any time fore-sworn the possibility of a neutral solution at which might seem to them to be the proper time. They had clearly been working, and working effectively, to strengthen the effort against the Viet Cong. But none of us had ever discussed what the next step would be after the Government of Viet Nam had reached a position of strength. Perhaps they did favor the French neutrality solution at that time. We had all concentrated exclusively on winning...Finally, Ambassador DOrlan di of Italy, who is one of the shrewdest men here, has thought ever since November that the Minh Government was actively in support of General De Gaulle's ideas and would turn overtly neutralist at the proper time. He had said this to me several times and had made much of the fact that both Don and Kim were still French citizens, had been aides to Marshal de Lattre when he was here, and had actively worked in the French Secret Service in the past. Therefore, opinion of the French in-tentions for neutralization coup might be correct.,. 4. Finally, in this country it rarely occurs to anyone that an election is an efficient or appropriate way to get anything important accomplished. The traditional way of doing important things here is by well planned, well thought out use of force, what General Khanh has done does not appear to have shocked 29the Vietnamese...However, numerous Vietnamese have expressed the opinion to members of my staff that it was a pity that General Minh was removed because he is a "good man." 5. The real question is, therefore Is Khanh able? Will he really supply some drive in connection with the effort against the Viet Cong? The evidence to date is that he is able, that he has a lot of drive, and that he is not tolerating any delay... 6. If Khanh is able, his advent to power may give this country one-man command in place of a junta. This may be good. Ue have everything we need in Viet Nam. The U.S. has provided military advice, training, equipment; economic and social help; and political advice. The Govern-ment of Viet Nam has put relatively large number of good men into important positions and has evolved civil and military procedures which appear to be workable. Therefore, our side knows how to do it; we have the means with which to do it; we simply need to do it. This requires a tough and ruthless commander. Perhaps Khanh is it. 41 Privately we continued, however, to be deeply chagrined and even shaken that we had not seen the coup coming. We recognized it was a severe blow to the stability of government that we had believed was so necessary for South Vietnam, and we doubted the charges that Khanh used as a justification for his actions. But we accepted his explanations, promised to support him, and hoped for the best. About all we could do was threaten to withhold aid and that was ineffective because it was increasingly apparent that we were as committed to the struggle as our clients were --possibly even more committed, whatever the real possibilities of influence may have been, we accepted as inescapable the fact that there was nothing we could do but go along with it. The President of the United States quickly offered his public expression of recognition and strong support. And one of our strongest resolves was to see what we might hit upon as a means to assure that we would not be taken again by a similar surprise. 6. Deepening Gloom in February Among the flood of SitReps that came in soon after the coup was "Commanders Personal Military Assessment of the Fourth Quarter, CY-63." 4-2 This was a report that MACV had been directed to establish at the end of the September 1963 visit of the Secretary and the CJCS in order to establish checkpoints by which to measure progress toward achievement of the goals agreed upon at that time. It is not essential here to review all of MACVs report but there are interesting details that are 30 --, NND 633 16.  worth noting. MACV's report gave central attention to the fact that the political turbulence during the last quarter of 1963 had been reflected in a regression in government control, and corresponding opportunities for the VC. The political instability had resulted, especially, in a decline of GVN control within the 13 provinces listed as critical at Honolulu n 20 November. The strategic hamlet program had received setbacks which forced the GVN's military forces to adopt a defensive posture. After this there came a somewhat equivocal statement that Analysis disclosed that, in spite of political turbulence, a satisfactory tempo of operation was maintained during this quarter. On the other hand, statistics clearly supported previous convictions that GVN operations were not effective when judged by reasonable standards of results versus effort expended. The immediate response to this analysis is to focus the advisory effort at all levels on the need for radical improvement in the effectiveness of operations. 43 What this seems to say is that GVN operations were satisfactory by the criteria which had been adopted for' judging them, yet they did not achieve results. This seems to amount to an admission that the criteria by which operations were judged did not lead to good judgments concerning the results that were being achieved by these operations. This appears, indeed, to have been very near the truth. Through-out this report there was a recognition of the effect of political and psychological and motivational factors upon real and effective capabilities. On the matter of training, the assessment was that it had "proven to be quantitatively satisfactory and flexible enough to meet the pressures and accelerated time schedules." But this expression of satisfaction that the nominal goals of training had been met was followed by the qualification that "the degree to which train-ing can, in fact, develop combat aggressiveness or compensate for the lack of other motivation remains a matter for concern and continuing scrutiny." The anomaly was expressed in words, but the fact of it seems to have gone almost unrecognized. When he turned to the two major areas of military action, first in the north and center and later in the Delta, MACV was obliged to admit that "there was little substantial progress toward completing the military progress in either of the two mador regions." But he seemed to have been so thoroughly imbued with a chin-up, never-say-die spirit that he rejected the pessimistic implications which he explicitly acknowledged were present. If the military aspects of the fourth quarter of calendar year 1963 were viewed in isolation, or 31could in any way be considered typical, the fore-cast would be pessimistic in nature and a complete reappraisal of U.S. effort, approach, and even policy would be indicated. However, viewed in the light of January operational improvements, the forecast remains one of potential long term military progress. 44 The improvements cited as grounds for not accepting the pessimis-tic implications were a new military plan to support the pacification program; adoption of U.S. advice concerning GVN management to cope with increasing VC threats, especially around Saigon; and some govern-ment operations that seemed to demonstrate improved military leadership, and what he called "victories" while admitting they were not decisive. The difficulty here was that the judgment did not include consideration that these happier signs had come under the regime which had just been overturned by the Khanh coup a day or two before this report was dis-patched, which coup, it was acknowledged, would have a disturbing and disruptive effect upon GVN capabilities as they had existed before the coup. Although it was still too soon to predict the full impact of the coup, it seemed "likely that at least part of the operational momentum which was being slowly generated earlier this month will be slowed for a time..." In closing this assessment, MACV philosophized, in words with which few would disagree, that experiences of the last quarter of calendar year 1963 disclosed "the extent to which military opportunities are dependent upon political and psychological policies and accomplish-ments in a counter-insurgency environment." And he found the big lesson "the broad implication" -- was, that no amount of military effort or capability can compensate for poor politics. Therefore, although the prospects for an improved military posture are good, the ultimate achievement of the established military goal depends primarily upon the quality of support achieved by the political leadership of the government of Vietnam at all levels. 45 Here again was an explicit judgment that the sine qua non of an effective counter-insurgency operation was a stable, broadly based, popular and effective government. It was acknowledged at this time, as it had been acknowledged before concerning other governments, that a government of these qualities did not exist. But along with the acknowledgment that what was described as the sine qua non did not exist, there was apparently always the hope that fate would not close in before something happened to change the situation. The U.S. mission Monthly Status Report, dated 9 February 1964, agreed with MACV that it was too soon to judge the effects of the Khanh coup. The Mission Report, following a week after the personal report of MACV, did not hesitate to express explicit regret over the 32, departure of Minh and Tho. In the "overall evaluation", there was the following key paragraph January witnessed distinct, if limited, pro-gress in GVN's organization and action, both on political front in Saigon and on counter-insurgency front in countryside. Nevertheless, by January 30, when General Khanh moved swiftly and bloodlessly to take over reins of government, GVN had still not achieved sufficient momentum either to stem growing tide of popular criticism against it or to register meaningful gains against VC. In retrospect, greatest single positive achievement during three months of post-Diem regime was measurable success of General Minh in establishing himself as popular national leader. Measure of his success reflected in General Khanh's obvious effort to keep Minh on his side and exploit Minh's growing popularity for benefit of second post-Diem regime. 46 On the same day that the Mission Report was dispatched, CIA addressed to the Secretary of Defense a special report which had just been received by the Director of CIA by Mr. Peer de Silva (CAS station chief in Saigon) and Mr. Lyman D. Kirkpatrick, concerning the situation in Vietnam with particular respect to the conduct of the war and the prognosis of the stability of the Khanh regime. The de Silva judgment was that The situation at this moment must be characterized as one in which the population at large appears apathetic, without enthusiasm either for the GVN or the VC sides but responsive to the latter because it fears the VC. The most important single factor appears to be whether or not the rural population will be willing to defend itself against the VC and to support GVN actions against the VC. In this sector there now seems to be less conviction and resolution, and a more widespread inclination to avoid the problems of obposing the VC, and to play both sides in hopes of somehow getting on peacefully and without personal commit-,ment. ...What is needed in this regard and very soon are a series of GVN successes in the military sphere which would go toward implanting and nourishing a popular attitude that the GVN has the means of bringing security and a sense of ease to the rural population and is clearly determined to do so on an ever broadening front throughout the countryside. Only within some such atmosphere of hopefulness can 33the will and resolve to oppose the VC be strengthened, and it must be if this war is to be won. 47 Mr. Kirkpatrick's comment was based upon his recent trip to South Vietnam I agree with the above but must note that even armed with your pessimistic comments following your last visit, I have been shocked by the number of our (CIA) people and of the military, even those whose jobs is always to say we are winning, who feel that the tide is against us. Admittedly, this is based on a limited number of discussions here and in Danang in three days. There are ominous indications that the VC are able to mount larger operations than in the past using bigger arms, including antiaircraft. Vietnamese government reactions are still slow, defensive and reminiscent of French tactics here a decade ago. There are still really no fundamental internal security measures of any effectiveness such as identity cards, block wardens, travel controls, etcIt is evident that a major factor in VC victories is their superior intelligence based on nationwide penetrations and intimidations at all levelsFinally, with the Laos and Cambodia borders, opened, this entire pacification effort is like trying to mop the floor before turning off the faucet. 48 Two days later the Secretary received an advance copy of SNIE 50-64, "Short-term Prospects in Southeast Asia." Its leading conclusion was(a) That the situation in South Vietnam is very serious and prospects uncertain. Even with U.S. assistance as it is now, we believe that, unless there is a marked improvement in the effectiveness of the South Vietnamese government and armed forces, South Vietnam has, at best, an even chance of withstanding the insurgency menace during the next few weeks or months. 49 In further explanation of this judgment, it was stated that the situation had been serious for a long time and in I ecent months it had deteriorated further. The VC had exploited dislocations caused by the November coup and then more recently by the January coup. Just as Minh's reorganization was beginning to be established, Khanh's coup upset everything, and Khanh's regime was not yet assessable. Meanwhile, the VC had improved in their organization and armament, were increasingly aggressive and acting in larger units. 34, 7 Two General Alternative Directions of Policy Thus as winter drew to an end in February-March 1964, it was recognized, as it had never been fully recognized before, that the situation in Vietnam was deteriorating so rapidly that the dimensions and kinds of effort so far invested could not hope to reverse the trend. This was indeed a turning point. The proposals for neutrali-zation that had been loosely suggested in late fall and early winter having been rejected, the issue to be resolved was what kinds of new efforts, and what new dimensions of U.S. effort, would be decided upon. One direction of effort which might have been chosen had, as its most articulate advocate, the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, Roger Hilsman. This was the policy line that, for better or for worse, was largely rejected. Mainly because of this policy disagreement, Mr. Hi 1sman left his post at almost the time it became evident that his views were conclusively overruled. At the time of his departure he wrote two memos to the Secretary of State (dated 14 March 1964); one on the Southeast Asia problem generally, one on South Vietnam. The latter of the two affords not only a good summary of his views on the subject, but also a statement of the policy alternatives that were, in significant measure, rejected. (Tile rejection was of course by no means total. It was a matter of degree and a question of where emphasis should lie among some programs that were not in dispute generically. But the matter of degree and emphasis was in dispute, and it was sufficient not only to induce Hilsman to resign but to alter drastically the course of U.S. involve-ment.) Hilsman wrote In my judgment, the strategic concept that was developed for South Vietnam remains basically sound. If we can ever manage to have it implemented with vigor, the result will be victory. The concept is based on the assumption that villages in Southeast Asia are turned inward on themselves and have little or no sense of identi-fication with either the national government or Communist ideologythat the villagers are isolated physically, politically, and psychologically. In such circumstances it is not difficult to develop a guerrilla movement... A corollary...is that the villagers greatest desire is security and that if the villagers are given security, some simple progress towards a better life, and--most important of all--a sense that the government cares about them and their future, they trill respond with loyalty... On the basis of..this assumption, the Security 35 .' strategic concept calls for primary emphasis on giving security to the villagers. The tactics are the so-called oil-blot approach, starting with a secure area and extending it slowly, making sure no Viet Cong pockets are leff behind, and using police units to winkle out sic the Viet Cong agents in each particular village. This calls for the use of military forces in a different way from that of orthodox, conventional war. Rather than chasing Viet Cong, the military must put primary emphasis on clear-and-hold operations and on rapid reinforcement of villages under attack. It is also important, of course, to keep the Viet Cong regular units off balance by conventional offensive operations, but these should be secondary to the major task of extending security... At the heart of this strategic concept are two basic principles The first is that of the oil blot. In the past the GVN sought to blanket the whole country with so-called strategic hamlets... The result was to blanket the Delta with little Dienbienphus indefensible, inadequately armed hamlets far from reinforcements...In effect these were storage places of arms for the Viet Cong which could be seized at any time. After November first, the military began to demobilize some of these vulnerable villages...and a race developed between the government and the Viet Cong. The race may have ended in a tie, but...the Viet Cong now have much better weapons and greater stocks of ammunition than they ever had before. The second basic principle is that the way to fight a guerrilla is to adopt the tactics of a guerrilla...In spite of all our pressures, this has never been done in Vietnam. Instead, the emphasis has been on large operations... As to the question of operations against North Vietnam, I would suggest that such opera-tions may at a certain stage be a useful supple-ment to an effective counterinsurgency program, but...not be an effective substitute... My own preference would be to continue the covert, or at least deniable operations..-Then, 36 ,By NWD Date 201 I after we had made sufficient progress in the Delta so that all concerned began to realize that the Viet Cong were losing the support of the population, and that their ability to continue the war depended solely on North Vietnamese support, I think we should indicate as much privately to the North Vietnamese and follow this by selected attacks on their infiltration bases and training camps. In my judgment, significant action against North Vietnam that is taken before we have demon-strated success in our counterinsurgency program will be interpreted by the Communists as an act of desperation, and will, therefore, not be effective in persuading the North Vietnamese to cease and desist. What is worse, I think that premature action will so alarm our friends and allies and a significant segment of domestic opinion that the pressures for neutralization will become formidable. In sum, I believe that we can win in Vietnam with a number of provisos. The first proviso is that we do not overmilitarize the warthat we concentrate not on killing Viet Cong...but on an effective program for extending the areas of security gradually, systematically, and thoroughly... My second proviso is that there be political stability in Saigon... 50 Some of the Hilsman recommendations were to be adopted, none rejected out-of-hand. The so-called oil blot principle had many adherents, and was in fact already oorm'ng into vogue. Over the ensuing months, the phrase was much honored, though the execution may have faltered. No one disputed the principle that the hamlets needed security above all else, nor that everything depended on a stable government in Saigon. Never-theless, emphasis shifted toward greater emphasis on military operations, perhaps for the pressing reason that the VC were out now in increasing numbers, with more and better weapons, seeming to invite, if not to require, conventional military operations if the VC threatening the hamlets were to be destroyed or reduced to powerlessness. And, above all, the more elusive the VC were, the stronger they grew, and the more unstable and unpopular the GVN became, the more tempting the idea of attacking the north seemed to be. Much more influential than these Hilsman views were those of the JCS, especially as set forth in the memorandum of 18 February 1964 to the SecDef from the CJCS 37, 1. Reference is made to the memorandum by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, dated 22 January 1961+... It sets forth a number of actions which the United States should be prepared to take in order to ensure victory...the Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the situation in South Vietnam with the view of determining additional actions which can be recommended for implementation immediately. 2. The Government of Vietnam has developed, with the close collaboration of the U.S. Military Assistance Command, a new National Pacification Plan which provides for the orderly pacification of the insurgency in accordance with a realistic phasing schedule...and it provides for consolidation of secure areas and expansion of them (the spreading oil drop'). U.S. military assets in Vietnam will fully support this plan, what is now required is implementation of additional actions which will insure an integrated political, socio-economic, and psychological offensive to support more fully the military effort. Accordingly, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the Country Team be directed to implement the fol 1 owing actions at the earliest practicable time a. Induce the GVN (General Khanh) military to accept U.S. advisors at all levels considered necessary by COMUSMACw (This is particularly applicable in the critical provinces)... b. Intensify the use of herbicides for crop destruction against identified Viet Cong areas as recommended by the GVN. c. Improve border control measures... d. Direct the U.S. civilian agencies involved in Vietnam to assist the GVN in producing a civilian counterpart package plan to the GVN National Pacification Plan... e. Provide U.S. civilian advisors to all necessary echelons and GVN agencies... f. Encourage early and effective action to implement a realistic land reform program. g. Support the GVN in a policy of tax forgiveness for low incomc population in areas 38where the GVN determines that a critical state of insurgency exists... h. Assist the GVN in developing a National Psychological Operations Plan...to establish the GVN and Khanhs 'images,' create a 'cause' which can serve as a rallying point for the youthstudents of Vietnam, and develop the long term national ob-jectives of a free Vietnam. i. Intensify efforts to gain support of U.S. news media representatives in Washington... j. Arrange U.S. sponsored trips to Vietnam by groups of prominent journalists and editors. k. Inform all GVN military and civilian officials...that the United States (a) considers it imperative that the present government be stabilised, (b) would oppose another coup, and (c) that the United States is prepared to offer all possible assistance in forming a stable government ...all U.S. intelligence agencies and advisors must be alert to and report cases of dissension and plotting in order to prevent such actions. 3- The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that the implementation of the foregoing measures will not be sufficient to exercise a decisive effect on the campaign against the Viet Cong. They are con-tinuing study of the actions suggested in the memorandum of 22 January 19611, as well as other proposals...Among the subjects to be studied as a matter of urgency are the following a. Intensified operations against North Vietnam to include air bombings of selected tar-getsb. Removal of restrictions for air and ground cross-border operations. c. Intelligence and reporting. d. U.S. organizational changes e. Increased U.S. Navy participation in shore and river patrol activities. f. Introduction of jet aircraft into the Vietnamese Air Force and the U.S. Air Commando unit...01 39Except for 2f, 2g, 2i, 2j, and the escalatory military actions of paragraph 3 that had been suggested previously by the JCS, this memo-randum outlined much of the program that was to be adopted by the SecDef in March after his trip to Saigon, and approved by the President thereafter as NSAM 288. 8. The Fact Finding Mission and NSAM 288 Before the Secretary left for Vietnam, trip books were prepared for his use and the use of others in his official party. In this trip was an appraisal of the Vietnam situation, dated 3 March 1964, prepared especially for this occasion by the normally optimistic SACSA. It began with this summary The RVN faces the most critical situation in its nearly 10 years of existence. This situation is the result of political erosion, culminating in two changes of government within three months and in a nationwide revamping of civil administra-tors, and of the continued grovrth of a well-organ!-zed, dedicated Communist insurgency movement. 52 This v?as followed by a political discussion wherein there was mention of the chronic shortage of competent administrators. The govern-ment was credited with superior material resources, but, "unless it is able to demonstrate the willpower and political skill to bring this potential to bear, the political and security situation will continue to deteriorate." It was considered hopeful that Khanh seemed determined to provide dynamic leadership, but it was' observed that he would have to overcome "widespread public and official apathy, lack of confidence, low morale, and factionalism among key personnel. Khanh1s efforts and attributes were catalogued approvingly, but this only lead to a concluding paragraph as follows Encouraging as Khanhs performance has been to date, he has not been able to counteract the overall trend of events in South Vietnam. In many of the most critical provinces, pacification programs remain at a virtual standstill and there is an evident lack of urgency and clear direction. 53 This vias followed by a section entitled "Military and Security Situation." This section contained an interesting judgment, which represented a reversal by SACSA of opinions expressed six months or more before concerning the time when the situation had begun to deteriorate. 40By the final quarter of 1963, the conclusion was inescapable that despite the considerable improvement in the offensive capabilities of the RVN's counter-insurgency forces, the VC likewise had improved their own capabilities. It became apparent that a gradual erosion of the govern-ment1s position throughout the country had been. underway since at least August 1963. This erosion became progressively worse after the November coup, although late in January 1964, the Minhgovernment exhibited some signs of assuming the initiative. This initiative dissolved with the Khanh coup on 30 January. Organizational dislocations brought about by coups have weakened the national direction of most of the counterinsurgency programs underway tliroughout the country. The large number of personnel changes, both locally and nationally, have played a crucial role in the indecision and lack of energetic direction of the government's programs. Despite General Khanh's expressed determination to prosecute the war vigorously, available statistics since his coup reflect a gradual decline in small-scale ARVN operations. In addition, Communist forces continue to enjoy the initiative and to execute disruptive operations at times and places of their own choosing... All available evidence points to a steady improvement in the VC's military posture, both quantitatively and qualitatively, throughout 1963 and the first two months of 1964...Emphasis supplied, 54 In advising the Embassy in Saigon of the intended visit of Secretary McNamara and General Taylor in March, a Joint StateDefense message outlined the issues that it was hoped would be taken up during the visit. Five major subject areas were named, each of which was divided into parts. Objectives were described, in general, as "to produce best possible evaluation of situation, assist you in measures to improve it, and help washington make future policy decisions." 55 The first subject area was a Review of Situation, in three parts political, economic, and military. It was suggested that the political review should be in executive session limited to the three principals (McNamara, Lodge and Taylor) and the DCM, Harkins, Brent, de Silva, and 41 . perhaps Zorthian. The subjects of prime interest were how Khanh was taking hold, and the dangers of further coups. Next in importance were the effectiveness of the civil administration and the morale of major religious and political groups, and measures to strengthen and buttress the Khanh regime. On the economic side, the Secretary hoped to get a full review of the economy, the budget, price and supply trends, AID operations, and, finally, the possibility of land reform and tax forgiveness. On the military side, it was suggested they begin with,the broad picture, and later proceed to selected critical provinces and specific provincial plans. The main interest, with respect to intelligence and reporting, was to review Country Team recommendations concerning periodic assessments and joint reporting requirements. After this the interest centered on intelligence concerning the VC specifically the extent of their control and activities in the provinces, intentions and tactics, and indicators thereof Then, clearly in anticipation of possible require-ment for public relations materials for use in U.S. 4. Handling of intelligence bearing on con-trol and direction of Viet Cong from North Vietnam including infiltration of personnel and weapons and operation of communications net. One of our basic projects here is preparing strongest possible material on this subject for use as appropriate to support stronger measures. We need to be sure your intelligence effort is geared to furnish such information promptly in usable form. 5- Review of draft (which we will supply) of control and support of VC by North Vietnam. 56 Concerning current operational problems, the items foreseen to be of interest were policy on possible evacuation of dependents, review of GVN national and provincial plans, rural rehabilitation plans, adequacy and deployment of ARVN, status and problems of paramilitary forces, current status and possible expansion of the U.S. Special Forces' role in connection with Civilian Irregular Defense Groups (CIDG), status of plans to reduce or reorganize U.S. forces as GVN became capable of performing functions currently performed by U.S., review of political and psywar progress, and of military tactics against VC, and "possible modification of existing operation al restrictions." The special third country problems of French activities in RVN, and of Cambodia and Laos, would be dealt with in executive session. The last item listed for special consideration was to review Operations Plan 34A-64, for feasibility, adequacy, and possible expan- T(jP SECRET  42 . sion, with special consideration to advantages derivable "from making it an overt Vietnamese program with participation by U.S. as required to obtain adequate results." 57 The language and the tone of this message suggest that, however pessimistic may have been the appraisals of the situation, there was no disposition to recognize any doubt that the struggle could be won or that we would undertake whatever measures were necessary to win it. Previously unprecedented escalator measures of a military nature were beginning to be studied tentatively as a response to the bad news that kept coming. Most of these were to be rejected, for the time being, except for moves to convey to NVN that an exchange of air blows between NVN and SVN was a possibility. This, it was hoped, might exploit NVN fears that if they persisted aiding the VC they faced the loss of their industrial establishment. Tire inferential significance of our considerations at this time seems to have been that we were already committed, by the momentum of our past actions, to a course which forbade turning back, however reluctant we might be about taking any forward step. A schedule for the trip was set up extending from the planned arrival on 8 March 1964- through 12 March. In the course of five days of briefings, conferences, and field trips, most of the details of a program, to implement policies already evidently largely agreed upon, were decided upon in the light of views and information elicited from our own and GVN officials. In the final meeting with General Khanh and his GVN associates, most of the programs for Vietnam which were later to be recommended to the President by Secretary McNamara were discussed. The exchange of views at that time was made a matter of record by a memcon, a summary of which was transmitted the next day by Ambassador Lodge. General Khanh...proposed National Service Act for SVN. Khanh said his government prepared embark upon program to mobilize all human and material resources to fight VC. As envisaged by General Khanh proposed National Service Act would have two major components military service and civil defense... Military service comprised of RVNAF... (actual strength 227,000; planned 251,683); Civil Guard (actual 90,032; planned 119,636). SDC & Hamlet Militia...(actual 257,960; planned 422,874). Civil Defense comprised of Civil Service Corps, Cadre Corps, National Youth, and Political-Administration Corps... Civil Defense component included Civil Administration Corps for work in countryside. Khanh emphasized that in civil defense sector all civilians would be included, .'.this segment also included civic action teams for hamlets and villages. 43 , Khanh emphasized figures were planning figures only and designed give idea of number of military and civilians required and indicate financial implications of plan... McNamara stated that U.Swould wish to study strength figures carefully; however, his first impression was that figure of 422,874 SDC and Hamlet Militia appeared unduly large and would be difficult to support. Khanh responded that in actual practice total numbers may not reach this level. In fact, number may not exceed 300,000 SDC and Hamlet Militia actually deployed against VC... Thieu stated that all men from age 18 through 40 would be required to participate in national pacification effort. Most of them... would serve in same positions they now occupy. others, such as National Youth Group up to a,ge 40, would be required serve in city and country-side and would be organized into small groups to assist ARVN and Civil Guard. Category of Political-Administration Corps would consist of cadres planned for assignment to villages and hamlets. General Thieu estimated that 125,000 such cadre would be required...McNamara stated that general approach appeared excellent but he questioned whether GVN would need 125,000 cadre...This number added to total figures for Civil Guard, SDC and Hamlet Militia, constituted an extremely large figure...population appeared disproportionate..desirable to look most closely at planning figures. Khanh replied that he intended make maximum effort in first instance in 8 critical provinces surrounding Saigon...However, a National Service Act would have a very good effect in Saigon and the other urban areas. McNamara inquired whether .upon his return to Washington he could tell President Johnson that General Khanh's government was prepared embark on a program of national mobilization of human and material resources and whether President Johnson in turn could inform the American people...Khanh replied in the affirmative... McNamara indicated that he viewed concept favorably and ...Ambassador stated that hefavored general concept but thought that detailed figures should be looked into carefully. Ambassador also believed that emphasis should be placed first on 8 critical provinces surrounding Saigon...General Harkins noted that a mobilization law was in fact in existence but that few people knew about it. He pointed out that ARVN, CG and SDC were not up to their authorized military strengths. Khanh said that he realized this but believed it still desirable to have a new law setting forth a national service or mobilization program. Harkins stated that MACV and other elements of U.S. Mission would like to work closely with Khanh...in developing such a law. z Khanh replied this well understood. McNamara said it was agreed on American side that general concept was a wise one and that we should proceed on this basis. Khanh then inquired whether it was desirable to raise CG to same relative status as ARVN as regards salary, pensions, survivors benefits, etc. He estimated that total cost would be in neighbor-hood of one billion piasters. McNamara thought this was highly desirable... McNamara inquired how long...it would take to recruit and train administrative cadre for 8 critical provinces near Saigon. Khanh estimated approximately one month, in any event he believed cadres could be in place by end of April. Khanh said GVN would aim for volunteers for this effort and it was not necessary to await promulgation of National Service Act. In response Taylor's question as to how long Khanh anticipated it would take to draft and promulgate National Service Law, Khanh observed that...law could be ready for his signature in very short time. Taylor pointed to necessity give due regard to democratic forms in developing and announcing a National Service Act. Khanh agreed and said that at same time a major effort was being made to pacify the countryside. He intended push for concurrent development of democratic institutions and forms. McNamara suggested that when Khanh ready announce a National Service Act that he also re-emphasize related actions...such as those for expansion of national 45economy, for increased educational opportunities in hamlets, for increased production of rice, for marketing of fish, and so forth. McNamara believed a well publicized announcement of this nature would find ready response among people and would materially assist Khanh to obtain and hold support of Vietnamese people 58 9. NSAM 288 The program formulated in March 1964 in connection -with the trip to Vietnam was reported orally to the President by the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs on their return, then presented formally to the President and the NSC by memorandum to the President dated 16 March. It was finally approved as NSAM 288 dated 17 March 1964. As such NSC documents go, NSAM 288 was comprehensive and programmatic. It reviewed U.S. objectives, appraised the situa-tion, discussed various alternative courses of action, and finally recommended a rather detailed program intended to serve the defined objectives and to meet the situation as it had been described. It consisted of seven parts. The first was a discussion and definition of objectives, the second a description of U.S. policy, the third an appraisal of the present situation, the fourth a discussion of alter-native courses of action, the fifth a consideration of possible actions, the sixth a mention of other actions considered but rejected, and seventh and last, a statement of specific recommendations. NSAM 288, being based on the official recognition that the situation in Vietnam was considerably worse than had been realized at the time of the adoption of NSAM 273, outlined a program that called for considerable enlargement of U.S. effort. It involved an assumption by the United States of a greater part of the task, and an increased involvement by the United States in the internal affairs of South Vietnam, and for these reasons it carried with it an enlarged commitment of U.S. prestige to the success of our effort in that area. In tacit acknowledgement that this greater commitment of prestige called for an enlargement of stated objectives, NSAM 288 did indeed enlarge these objectives, whereas, in NSAM 273 the objectives were expressly limited to helping the government of South Vietnam win its contest against an externally directed Communist conspiracy, NSAM 288 escalated the objectives into a defense of all of Southeast Asia and the Vest Pacific and redefined American foreign policy and American security generally. In NSAM 273 the statement of objectives was comparatively simple and limited; It remains the central object of the United States in South Vietnam to assist the people and the government of that country, to win their contest against the externally directed 46- . and supported Communist conspiracy. Tire test of all U.S. decisions and actions in this area should be the effectiveness of their contribution to this purpose. 59'In contrast to this, the statement of "U.S. Objectives in South Vietnam" in NSAM 288 was considerably more extensive and more central to U.S. security interests we seek an independent non-Communist South Vietnam. We do not require that it serve as a western base or as a member of a Western alliance. South Vietnam must be free, however, to accept outside assistance as required to maintain its security. This assistance should be able to take the form not only of economicand social measures but also police and military help to root out and control insurgent elements. Unless we can achieve this objective in South Vietnam, almost all of Southeast Asia will probably fall under Communist dominance (all of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia), accommodate to Communism so as to remove effective U.S. and anti-Communist influence (Burma), or fall under the domination of forces not now explicitly Communist but likely then to become so (Indonesia taking over Malaysia). Thailand might hold for a period without help, but would be under grave pressure. Even the Philippines would become shaky, and the threat to India on the West, Australia and New Zealand to the South, and Taiwan, Korea, and Japan to the North and East would be greatly increased. All of these consequences would probably have been true even if the U.S. had not since 1954, and especially since 1961, become so heavily engaged in South Vietnam. However, that fact accentuates the impact of a Communist South Vietnam not only in Asia but in the rest of the world, where the South Vietnam conflict is regarded as a test case of U.S. capacity to help a nation to meet the Communist "war of liberation." Thus, purely in terms of foreign policy, the stakes are high... 60 The argument in the next to last paragraph of NSAM 288 that "all these consequences would probably have been true even if the U.S. had not since 1954, and especially since 1961, become so heavily engaged i.n SVN" is clearly debatable. But the logic that the increasing U.S. 47involvement led to increasing commitment of U.S. prestige is probably beyond argument. And it is probably also true that, in theextent to which we defined the issues simply and centrally as a symbolic confrontation with Communism, wherein far more is at stake than the immediate battlefield (in South Vietnam) on which we fought and acted upon this definition and proclaimed it as the issue we tended more and more to endow the issue with that significance whether or not it had in fact been the issue in the first place. And this point, if closely examined, might logically have raised the question of whether it is absolutely necessary to accept any challenge put to us, and if so what advantage this confers upon our enemies in granting them the choice of issue and of battleground. Finally, a struggle so defined came close to calling for war a outrance -- not the centrally political war, with severe restriction upon violent means, following counter-guerrilla warfare theory. and our not the Despite the encompassing nature of the definition of objectives, although NSAM 288 proposed a marked increase in U.S. involvement, implementing programs remained comparatively limited as if we did fully believe these strong words. We even expressed agreement with older idea of helping the Vietnamese help themselves. We are now trying to help South Vietnam defeat the Viet Cong, supported from the North, by means short of the unqualified use of U.S. combat forces, we are not acting against North Vietnam except by a modest"covert" program operated by South Vietnamese (and a few Chinese Nationalists) a program so limited that it is unlikely to have any significant effect...61 There was a further statement of this older policy theme There were and are some sound reasons for the limits imposed by the present policy the South Vietnamese must win their own fight; U. S. intervention on a larger scale, andor GVN actions against the North, would disturb key allies and other nations; etc. In any case, it is vital that we continue to take every reasonable measure to assure success in South Vietnam. The policy choice is not an "eitheror" between this course of action and possible pressures against the North; the former is essential and without regard to our decision with respect to the latter. The latter can, at best, only reinforce the former. o2 At the end of this section, which described measures that we would take to assist the Khanh government in administering interna program, there was a final admonition 48Many of the actions described in thc succeeding paragraphs fit right into the framework of the Pacification7 plan as announced by Khanh. Wherever possible, we should tie our urgings of such actions to Khanh1s own formulation of them, so tnat he will be carrying out a Vietnamese plan and not one imposed by the "United States. Emphasis supplied 63 The discussion of the situation in Vietnam began with the statement that the military tools and concepts that had been adopted were sound and adequate. But much needed to be done in terms of a more effective employment both of military forces and of the economic and civic action means already available. This improved effort might require some selective increases in the U.S. presence. These increases were not considered to be necessarily major in nature and not in contradiction to "the U.S. policy of reducing existing military personnel where South Vietnamese are in a position to assume the functions..." No major reductions of U.S. personnel in the near future were ex-pected, but it continued to be the basic policy that there would be gradual U.S. withdrawal from participation. This was considered to be sound because of its effect "in portraying to the U.S. and the world that we continue to regard the war as a conflict the South Vietnamese must win and take ultimate responsibility for." And along this line there was the continued hope that "substantial reductions in the num-bers of U.S. military training personnel should be possible before the end of 1965. (The language here suggested a beginning retreat from NSAM 273).'It was conceded, however, that "the situation has unquestionably been growing worse, at least since September..." Forty percent of the territory was then under the Viet Cong control or predominant in-fluence, and twenty-two of the forty-three provinces were controlled fifty percent or more by the Viet Cong. Other indications of the continuing deterioration were that large groups of the population dis-played signs of apathy and indifference, while frustration was evident within the U.S. contingent. Desertion rates within the ARVN and the Vietnamese paramilitary were particularly high and increasing --especiaIly in the latter. Draft.-dodging was high; but the Viet Cong were recruiting energetically and effectively. The morale of the hamlet militia and of the SDC, upon which the security of the hamlets depended, was poor and falling. The position of the government within the pro-vinces was weakening. The machinery of political control extending from Saigon down to the hamlets had virtually disappeared following the November coup. Of forty-one incumbent province chiefs on November 1, thirty-five had been replaced. Nine provinces had had three province chiefs in three months, and one province had had four. Lesser officials had been re- 49placed by the score. Almost all major military commands had changed hands twice since the November coup and the faith of the peasants had been shaken by disruptions in experienced leadership and loss of physical security. There was an increase in North Vietnamese support, and communica-tion between Hanoi and the Viet Cong had increased. CHICOM 75 milli-meter recoilless rifles and heavy machine guns were increasingly in evidence among the Viet Cong. The greatest source of weakness in the present situation was the uncertain viability of the Khanh government. The greatest need, there-fore, was to do the things that would enhance the stability of that government, and at the same time provide the advice and assistance that was necessary to increase its capabilities to deal with the problems confronting it. Among the alternatives considered, but rejected for the time being (along with complete adoption of the Hilsman formulations), were overt military pressure on North Vietnam, neutralization, return of U. S. dependents, furnishing of a U.S. combat unit to secure the Saigon area, and a full takeover of the command in South Vietnam by the U.S. with respect to this last proposal, it was said that ...the judgement of all senior people in Saigon, with which we concur, was that the possible mili-tary advantages of such action would be far out-weighed by adverse psychological impact. It would cut across the whole basic picture of the Vietnamese winning their own war and lay us wide open to hostile propaganda both within South Vietnam and outside. 64 The areas of action that were favored and that formed the basis of the specific recommendations to which the paper led, fell under two major and two minor headings. The two major headings were, (1) civil and military mobilization and (2) improvement of military forces. The two minor headings were (1) additional military equipment for the GVN and (2) economic actions. The first point under civil and military mobilization was to put the whole country on a war footing. The purpose was to main-tain and strengthen the armed forces, to assist other national efforts, and to remedy the recognized inequities and under-utiliza-tion of current manpower policies. Specifically, there was proposed a, new national mobilization plan including a national service law, which was to be developed on an urgent basis by the Country Team in collaboration with the Khanh Government. To this end the third of the several recommendations at the conclusion of the report called 50for the U.S. to "support a program of national mobilization (including a national service law) to put South Vietnam on a war footing." A second measure under this heading was to strengthen the armedforces, both regular and paramilitary by at least 50,000 men. Of these, about 15,000 would be required to fill the regular armed forces (ARVN) to their current authorized strength, 5,000 would be needed to fill the existing paramilitary forces to their authorized strengths, and the remaining 30,000 would be to increase the strength of the paramili-tary forces. To this end it was specifically recommended that the U. S; "assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces (regular plus para-military) by at least 50,000 men." The third measure of mobilization was to assist in an increase of the civil administrative corps of Vietnam by an additional 7,500 in 1964, with the ultimate target of at least 4-0,000 men for service in 8,000 hamlets and 2,500 villages, and in 3 provincial centers. It was specified that in accomplishing this the United States should work with the GVN to devise necessary recruiting plans, training facilities, financing methods and organizational arrangements, and should furnish training personnel at once under the auspices of the AID mission. The specific recommendation was "to assist the Vietnamese to create a greatly enlarged civil administrative corps for work at province, district and hamlet levels." The improvement of SVN military forces was to be accomplished not only by the increase in numbers specified above, but also by internal reforms and organizational improvements, what remained of the current hamlet militia and related forces of part-time nature for hamlet defense should be consolidated with the self-defense corps into a single force which would be compensated by the national government. The pay and collateral benefits of the paramilitary groups should be substantially improved. Strength of the forces should be maintained and expanded by effectively enforced conscription measures and by more centrally directed recruitment policies. It was recommended that U.S. personnel should be assigned to the training of the paramilitary forces. The National Police required further special consideration. An offensive guerrilla force should be created to operate along the border and in areas where VC control was dominant. These measures were included in specific recommendations to "assist the Vietnamese to improve and re-organize the paramilitary forces and to increase their compensation" and "to assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla force." Under the last two headings there were recommendations to provide the Vietnamese Air Force with 25 A-1H aircraft in exchange for their T-28s and to provide the Vietnamese Army additional M-113 APCs (withdrawing the M-1l4s there) and also to provide additional river boats and approxi-mately 5 to 10 million dollars worth of related additional materiel. A 51 ,By NWD Date 201 1 fertilizer program to increase the production of rice in areas safely controlled by the government was to be expanded and announced very soon. Although VC successes in rural areas had been the prime feature of the downswing over the past half year or more, pacification was" to receive less comparative emphasis, in fact, in the next year or so than it had before. Nevertheless, Khanh's statement of a pacification strategy which was later to form a conceptual basis for the ill-fated Hop Tac program was approved in principle, and a critique of it was accorded a place as Annex B of NSAM 288. In simplified outline, the plan was based on a "clear and hold" concept, including for each area these steps 1. Clearing organized VC units from the area by military action; 2. Establishing permanent security for the area by the Civil Guard, Self Defense Corps, hamlet militia, and national police; 3- Rooting out the VC "infrastructure" in the hamlets (particu-larly the VC tax collector and the chief of the VC political cadre); 4. Providing the elements of economic and social progress for the people of the area schools, health services, water supply, agricultural improvements, etc. These general ideas were to be (1) adapted and applied flexibly... (2) applied under the clear, undivided and decentralized control of the province chief; and (3) applied in a gradually spreading area moving from secure to less secure areas and from more populated to less popu-lated areas (the "oil drop" principle)... The major requirements for success of the Pacification Plan were First, and of by far the greatest importance, clear, strong, and continuous political leadership... General Khanh and his top colleagues were to supply this require-ment. Their ability to do so was as yet untested, but some early evidence was good... A second major requirement for success of the Pacification Plan was the adoption of government policies which would give greater pro-mise of economic progress and greater incentives to rural people. The three key areas werethe price of rice to fanners, which was artificially depressed and held substantially below the world market price;uncertain or oppressive tenure conditions for many farmers (a 52land reform program was half completed some years ago); the VC had been exploiting the situation very effectively;- oppressive marketing conditions for fisherman (fisheries accounted for 25 per cent of the rural product of SVN). General Khanh's initial statement about the land reform problem was not very encouraging; Mr. Oanh was not even aware of the rice problem until a conversation with U.S. visitors on March 10th. A third major requirement for success of the Pacification Plan was to improve greatly the leadership, pay, training, and numbers of some of the kinds of personnel needed, notablypay and allotrances for Civil Guards and S.D.C...recruitment and training for more civilian technicians...also increased pay and supporting costs for them; and recruitment and training of a new kind of rural worker"hamlet action teams" to move into newly cleared hamlets and start improvement programs... The real problems were managerial to develop concepts, training schools, action programs, and above all, leadership at the provincial level and below. Other requirements for success of the Pacification Plan included improvement in the leadership and attitudes of the ARVN particularly at levels which came into contact with villagers; greatly increased military civic action programs by the ARVN; much more flexibility and decentralization of authority in the administration of GVN civilian agencies; and a far clearer and more consistent pattern of rewarding excellence and penalizing poor performance in the management of both military and civilian agencies of the GVN. Finally, there was one prominent recommendation (it was in fact the second of twelve) that the U.S. "make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government and are opposed to any further coups." This reflected our deep concern over the political instability and our dismay at having been surprised by the Khanh coup at the end of January. An immediate measure to provide this kind of support to Khanh was the issuance on the following day (17 March) of a White House release which gave Presidential public blessing to the Khanh regime, saying in part that, to meet the difficulties and setbacks that had arisen since last October, "General Khanh and his government are acting vigorously and effectively...having produced a sound central plan for the prosecution of the war, recognizing to a far greater 53 . degree than before the crucial role of economic and social, as well as military action..." 65 This statement helped to solidify the Khanh regime by giving it explicit assurance of continuing U.S. support. It did not fully take care of our dismay over the surprise that the Khanh coup had been, and our fear that such a coup might be repeated. In addition to making it clear that we fully supported the incumbent regime,therefore, it seemed necessary that we should discourage attempted- coups, or, getting wind of them, head them off before they passed the point of no return. On 18 March, W. H. Sullivan of State sent out a message to Saigon as follows Point 2..,of NSAM 288 stipulated that U.S. government agencies should make clear our full support for Khanh government and our opposition to any further coups, while it is recognized that our chances of detecting coup plotting are far from fool-proof..all elements of U.S. mission in Vietnam should be alerted against coup contin-gencies. Mission should establish appropriate procedure which will assure that all rumors of coup plotting which come to attention of any U.S. government personnel in Vietnam trill be brought to attention of Ambassador without delay. This is not, repeat not, a responsibility solely for intelligence elements of the U.S. mission. 66 The program embodied in NSAM 288 was by no means judged adequate by all concerned. One major dissent had been registered by the JCS, who tended to view the problem primarily in its military dimensions, and who believed that the source of VC strength in the North must be neutralized. In a memorandum dated 14 March 1964, the CJCS had pro-vided the Secretary of Defense with comments on the SecDefs draft memo to the President (NSAM 288). The general view of the JCS was that the program being recommended by the Secretary of Defense was inadequate militarily, and that much more aggressive policies, mainly against NVH, but also against the Cambodian sanctuaries of VC forces, were necessary. a. The JCS do not believe that the recommended program in itself will be sufficient to turn the tide against the Viet Cong in SVN without positive action being taken against the Hanoi government at an early date. They have in mind the conduct of the kind of program designed to bring about cessation of DRV support for operations in SVN and Laos outlined in JCSM-174-64, subject "Vietnam," dated 2 March 1964. 54 . Such a program would not only deter the aggres-sive actions of the DRV but would be a source of encouragement to SVN which should significantly facilitate the counterinsurgency program in that country. To increase our readiness for such actions, the U.S. Government should establish at once the political and military bases in the U.S. and SVN for offensive actions against the North and across the Laotian and Cambodian borders, including measures for the-control of contraband traffic on the Mekong. b. In view of the current attitude of the Sihanouk Government in Cambodia, the JCS recommend authorizing now hot pursuit into that country.. ,67 An already noted, however, this sort of escalation had already been rejected for the time being. And in any event, there were both a new regime in Vietnam and an enlarged program of U.S. aid to support it, although not as enlarged militarily, as the JCS would wish. (That form of enlargement would not come until later.) But it was the first program since 1961 enlarged in explicit recognition that the programs preceding it had not succeeded, had indeed fallen far short of their goals. And in that sense at least it was the end of one period and the beginning of another. 55 . IwC.l. II. NSAM-288TONKIN GULF 1. General Character of the Period from NSAM-288 to Tonkin Gulf In enunciating the policies of NSAM-288 we had rhetorically committed ourselves to do whatever was needed to achieve our stated objectives in South Vietnam. The program decided upon and spelled out in NSAM-288 re-flected our recognition that the problem was greater than we had previously supposed and that the progress that we had previously thought we were mak-ing was more apparent than real. The program constituted a larger effort than we had undertaken before; it corresponded to our'increased estimates of the magnitude of the task before us. Nevertheless, we might have chosen,to do more along the lines of what we did decide to do, and above all we might have chosen to do some things that we specifically chose not to do at this time (although we began to plan for some of these on a contingency basis). If there were to be new or greater problems in the future it was because we did not correctly appraise the magnitude of the problem nor fully foresee the complexity of the difficulties we faced. There were indeed some who believed that the program we decided upon was not enough, notably the JCS who had gone on record that until aid to the VC from outside of South Vietnam was cut off, it would be impossible to eliminate the insur-gency there. But the program as decided upon in 288 did correspond to the official consensus that this was a prescription suited to the illness as we diagnosed it. There were many inhibitions that discouraged doing more than the bare necessity to get the job done. These inhibitions related to the image of the U.S. in world affairs, to possible risks of over-reaction from the Communist side, to internal American hesitancies about our operations there, and finally to a philosophy concerning the basic social nature of what was happening in Vietnam and how wise it was for the U.S. to become very deeply involved. We had given serious thought to a program of pressures upon the North, largely covert and intended more to persuade than to compel. This was on the theory that the heart of the problem really lay not in South Vietnam but in North Vietnam. But these measures, although far from for-gotten, were put on the shelf in the belief, or at least the hope, that they would not be needed. The long year from March 1964 to April 1965 is divisible into three periods that correspond to major modifications or reformulations of policy. The first would be from March (NSAM-288) to the Tonkin Gulf affair in early August 1964, the second would be from August 1964 to February of 1965, and the third would be from February to April 1965 From March to August 1965 we tried to make a go of it with the program approved in NSAM-288, in hope that that program would carry us toward our,objectives by increasing the amount of aid and advice we gave to the South Vietnamese in order to enable them better to help themselves. But almost from the beginning there were signs that this program' would not be enough. And as time passed it became more and more evident that something more would be needed. Soon we began to be turned from full concentration upon the NSAM-288 program by a major distraction--instabi1ity and inefficiency of the GVN. This was a distraction that from the first we had feared but had hoped against hope would not grow to major proportions. A year before, in 1963, it had become more and more evident as time wore on that the unpopularity and inefficiencies of the Diem-Ngu regime destroyed the hope of permanent progress in the pacification program and the ultimate chance of success of the whole counter-insurgency effort. This time it was the increasing instability of the Khanh regime and the ineffici-ency of his government--the regime that had supplanted the regime that had supplanted Diem and Ngu. Now we feared the inability of the Khanh govern-ment to attract and hold the loyalties of the politically active groups within the cities, and we had no confidence in its competence to administer the pacification programs, and thereby win the support of the politically inert peasantry in the rural areas. But we wanted no more coups. Although Khanhs coup had surprised us and even shaken our confidence somewhat, we quickly made him our boy, put the best possible face on the matter, and made it a prime element of U.S. policy to support Khanh and his colleagues, and discourage any further coups. Each coup that occurred, it seemed, greatly increased the possibility of yet another coup. Through the first period from March until July, we concentrated upon making the NSAM-288 program work. In addition to the increases in U.S. aid and advice, we sought to strengthen Khanh by patching things up with Big Minh and mollifying the other Generals he had thrown out. We hoped he could somehow subdue the politically active Buddhists, the Catholic political activists, the Dai Viet, and the miscellaneous ambitious colonels and gen-erals. But execution of the 288 program began to fall behind the plans. The GVN administration of the program had troubles. There were troubles getting piastres-which the U.S. government in effect provided-from the central government to the provinces and districts where they were needed. Agreed pay increases and force increases in the GVN armed forces were only tardily and partially met. Civil servants needed to operate the program in the provinces and districts were not available, were not trained, or, if avail-able and trained, were often not paid, or were insufficiently or tardily paid, or were not provided with necessary expenses. Funds for the provision of necessary goods in the provinces and districts were not met. Payments to peasants for relocation as a part of the pacification program were tardy or inadequate or not made at all.' There seemed to be a business as usualattitude in the central government, and the strength of the RVNAF declined. Viet Cong depredations continued and pacification efforts fell behind. As we pressured Khanh to adopt reforms to remedy the deficiencies of the GVN administration of programs within South Vietnam, his frustrations over these difficulties and failures were increased. He had no taste for the long, unspectacular social reform and social rebuilding that were the tasks of pacification. He soon began to talk increasingly of a scapegoat a march to the North. He wanted to get the struggle over with. This cor-responded to the means that we had considered but had for the time being rejectedseeking escape from our own frustrations in South Vietnam by pressure on the North. We moved gradually in this direction, impelled almost inevitably to ultimate actions of this sort, but always reluctantly and always hesitant to commit ourselves to more than very minor moves, until suddenly and dramatically the Tonkin Gulf affair of early August provided an occasion to make a move of the sort we had long been anticipating but had until then always deferred. But during this period the debate over pos-sible measures of this sort, and the instability of the Khanh government, increasingly distracted attention from programs focussed directly on the problems of pacification and of winning the loyalties of the Vietnamese for the GVN. In the immediate aftermath of the Tonkin Gulf affair, Khanh, feeling his position strengthened, took ill advised measures to consolidate the gains that he believed had been made thereby, and quickly precipitated an overriding governmental crisis. Thereafter, the stability of the regime became the dominant factor in all considerations. Attention had to shift from pacification of the millions of rural Vietnamese, who made up the vast majority of the people, to the very few in Saigon, Hue and Danang who were struggling for power. 2. NSAM-288 Programs Mid-March to Mid-May 1964 Recommendation #3 of NSAM-288 was "to support a program for national mobilization (including a national service law) to put South Vietnam on a war footing." Responsibility for this was shared between ASDISA and AID. A first step was taken on 20 March when the country team was asked to report on the status of GVN plans and also country team views concerning the adoption of a national service act. The points of greatest concern were what would be the main provisions of the act, and what would be the administrative machinery set up to implement it. The Country Team was also advised that economic mobilization measures should be deferred until after a joint U.S.-GVN 'survey had been completed. 68 On 1 April Ambassador Lodge replied, with MACV concurrence, that Premier Khanh planned two categories of mobilization, one civil and onemilitary. The Ambassador said that proposed decrees had been prepared and that if promulgated they would give the GVN adequate power. Details were not included, however, in the Ambassadors report. The Ambassador proposed, on a personal basis, that, if washington approved, he would try to persuade Khanh to proceed with a mass media presentation of it. 69 Washington agreement to the Embassy evaluation came three days later, although only the general concept had been explained. On that same day, 4 April 1964, Khanh publicly proclaimed a basic decree prescribing broad categories of national service. Its main terms were that all able-bodied males ages 20-45 were subject to national public service. This national public service was to consist of either (a) military service or (b) civil defense service. This initial decree of 4 April 1964 amounted evidently to nothing more than a statement of intention by the Prime Minister. This was quite short of a law that would go into effect, be administered and thereby made to accomplish something. On 10 April, the Embassy was informed by a telegram from State that Khanhs decrees had received little publicity in the United States, and the Embassy was asked for a text of the implementing decrees. Five days later on 15 April 1964, Ambassador Lodge reported in more detail on the basic terms of the national public service decree, to wit (1) All able-bodied males 20-45 would be subject to national public service and females would be permitted to volunteer. (2) National public service would consist of either military service or civil defense service. (3) Civil defense service would be managed by the Ministry of Interior. c (4) The duration of military service would be three years of RVNAF or four years in Regional Forces (Civil Guard) and Popular Forces (Civil Defense Corps and Hamlet Militia). (5) Call-up priority would be based on age and number of dependents. (6) Drafted personnel were to be paid by the force to which they were assigned. This came closer to a law to be administered, but on 28 April washington told the Embassy that the status of implementation of the recommendations was still not clear. Four days later, on 2 May, Ambassador lodge reported that draft decrees were still not signed in fact, and that the final nature of the Civil Defense Decree was still in doubt. However, he reported agreement on the principle that the objectives of the National Mobilization Planshould give priority to (1) bringing the armed forces to authorized strength, (2) improving their morale, (3) carrying out conscription more effectively, and (4) obtaining qualified civilian workers. 70 Before he was able to make this report of 2 May, however, Ambassador Lodge had a showdown meeting with Khanh over the failure of the GVN to carry out many of the necessary actions called for by the NSAM-288 programs. On 30 April, accompanied by Westmoreland and Brent (USOM chief), Lodge met with Khanh, Oanh, Khien, and Thieu, to discuss the GVN failure to provide operating funds to provincial and lower local levels, and to correct manpower deficien-cies. Lodge opened the meeting with a prepared statement which he read in French. He said that direct observation by U.S. provincial advisors through-out Vietnam proved that nowhere was there an adequate effort to provide piastres to Corps, Division and sectors, to increase the pay of ARVN and paramilitary forces, to bring these troops to authorized strength, to recruit added forces, or to compensate incapacitated soldiers or families of those killed. In fact, he said, there were confirmed reports from Corps and Divi-sion headquarters of deceased soldiers being kept on the roles as the only means of compensating their families and preventing further deterioration of ARVN and paramilitary morale. There had been a steady decline in the strength of RVNAF since October 1963, notably including a decrease of 4,000 in March alone; and the current strength was almost 20,000 below the authorized figure agreed necessary by both governments. Likewise, the force level of SDC had decreased in the same period by almost 13,000, leaving that force 18,000 below its authorized strength The Civil Guard was almost 5,000 below the required strength. The ARVN and CG desertion rate was double what it had been in February, and SDC desertion rate was up 40. Only 55 of the con-scription quotas were being met and volunteers were below the expected level. Failure to provide funds was blamed as a major reason,for these mili-tary manpower deficiencies. The shortage was so great that the current trend in effectives could not be reversed before August in any event. ge went on to say that USOM and MACV visits to the provinces also confirmed that failure to provide piastres to local headquarters also led co shortages of resources for pacification efforts. The result was that moot of the McNamara program of reforms and improvements (of NSAM-288) was failing, not due to lag in support promised by the United States, but simply because e Saigon government did not provide piastre support for the joint pacification program agreed upon by the twq governments. The war, Lodge concluded, was being lost for want of administrative initiative in printing and drstribut-ing the necessary local funds for the agreed programs. Lodge conceded that the government had made a forward step in announcing its intentions to de-centralize procurement authority from the Director General of the Budget and Foreign Aid to the ministries, but further decentralizauion to provin-cial and district authorities was advisable. 60 . Khanh passed the buck to Oanh, who explained that the MRC had inherited enormously complicated bureaucratic procedures based on older French practices, with checks and counterchecks before actions could be effected, and that these practices were being reformed. New regulations were about to go into effect and it was hoped that they would improve the situation. 71 Recommendation #5 of 288 had been "to assist the Vietnamese to create a greatly enlarged administrative corps." Effective action upon this recommendation was considered essential to effective progress in the pacification program, as is clearly implied by the following list of the lines of action that were to be strengthened by the enlarged administrative corps. These were 1. Training and pay of new hamlet action cadres, of new village secretaries, of district chiefs and other district staff, of a new assistant for pacification for each Province Chief, and of hamletschool teachers, health workers, district agricultural workers, and rural information officers. 2. Special incentive pay for government workers in rural areas. 3. Selective pay raises for some civil servants. 4. Increasing enrollment in the National Institute of Administration (NIA) to full capacity (this was a training school for civil servants), including provision of short term in-service training by NIA. 5. Organization of a joint U.S.-GVN Committee on governmental reform to review, recommend, and install needed provisions in governmental procedures. 6. Expanding and training National Police especially for rural areas consistent with other recommendations to strengthen military and paramilitary forces. 72 Along with this increase in Vietnamese administrative personnel there was to be an increase in U.S. advisory personnel to assist them. On 2 April the Mission advised Washington that a general agreement had been reached with the GVN and estimated that 12 additional USOM public administration personnel were needed. On the following day, however, the Ambassador expressed his reservations over the large increase in staff. On 30 April in an EXDIS to the President, Lodge said that Khanh was willing to accept U.S. administrators in pacified areas provided the U.S. felt willing to accept casualties. Lodge recommended a high level civil administrative advisor to Khanh himself; and on 4 May in an EXDIS to the Secretary of State he recommended four AID public administrative advisors, one to each of the four Corps areas, all to be directly under the Ambassador. 73' 61 . As of mid-May, however, while there were some accomplishments, on the whole there had been more discussion than action. Before the mid-May meeting for Secretary McNamara in Saigon the status of progress was summarized for him in the Mid-May Briefing Book as follows li The initiation of a two-week training program for district chiefs had started and the first class had graduated. 2. Assignment had been made of one entire graduating class, 82 of them with three full years of training, to be district chiefs. 3. Training of 75 hamlet action cadres for use in the Pacification Plan had been initiated. 4. Assignment of 700 Saigon civil servants to the III Corps area had been completed (but two-thirds of them had returned by midMay as either unfit or in excess of needs). 5 The long standing training programs for hamlet workers had continued. 6. A course to train 2500 new village secretaries had been initiated. 7- Assurance that all future graduates of NIA would be assigned to the countryside had been made. 8. There was a promise to undertake to double the output of graduates from the NIA. No action had been taken, however, on other measures. The most salient inaction was the failure to set up the promised U.S.-GVN committee on government reform. Further, the GVN was not inclined to provide incentive pay to key rural workers. At the time that Secretary McNamara and his party went to Saigon in the middle of May, the problem areas with respect to implementation of NSAM-288 recommendations were identified as follows 1. Inadequate provision of piastres for proper utilization of already trained officials and technicians. 2. Possible inability of GVN to get the job done without direct U.S. participation. 3. Lack of information from the field on plans for aggressive implementation of all aspects of this recommendation. 74 62 . Recommendations 4, 6, and 7 of NASM-288 concerned increases in GVN military forces and capabilities and were generally considered together 4. To assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces (regular plus paramilitary) by at least 50,000 men. 6. To assist the Vietnamese to improve and reorganize the paramilitary forces and to increase their compensation. 7. To assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla force.. On 23 March 1964 a joint State-Defense-AID message asked the country team to refine (and elaborate) these concepts and recommend a program of implementing actions. The mission was authorized to initiate appropriate first steps without waiting for final agreement between the USG and the GVN. There followed, as already noted, the pertinent proclamations of early April, but they were only proclamations, nothing more. On 27 April General Harkins reported that GVN planning for reorganization of paramilitary forces and development of a concept for programs was still in process. General Phat, the Minister of Interior, was considering a merger of SDC and Combat Youth into a single organization (the Popular Forces) under the Ministry of Interior. The Civil Guard would go under the Army high command. Operational control of Popular Forces would be vested in sector and sub-sector commanders at province and district levels. At village levels, Popular Forces would encompass the total local security force and would include both full-time and part-time personnel. Details of compensation and the logistic mechanism were not clear. Harkins judged that the concept was consistent with the Pacification Plan, but the total anticipated strength of Popular Forces could not be projected until more detailed planning had been accomplished. Detailed negotiations with the GVN were continuing and a further report was to be made on 10 May. 75 Two days later, on 29 April 1964, the JCS commented on the slowness of the GVN in implementing recommendations for 6 and 7 and pointed out an apparent divergence between MACV and GVN on the strength and organization of the GVN forces. They explained that the 50,000 figure was an interim planning figure, and that further increases should be recommended when and as necessary. COMUSMACV was asked to submit his detailed plan for implementing 4, 6, and 7 by the 7th of May. 76 Almost simultaneously with this JCS message, Harkin's deputy, General westmoreland, was accompanying Ambassador Lodge to see Khanh on the occasion, already described, when Ambassador Lodge made his strong demarche with the Vietnamese Premier. Westmoreland expatiated on the military aspects of the Ambassadors complaint, especially the RVNAF deficiencies, specifying increased desertion rates and inadequate enlistments and draftcallups. He calculated that at the current rates of desertion, casualties and recruitment the RVNAF at the end of the year would be smaller not larger than at present. Finally, on 7 May, Harkins was able to report that a USG-GVN agreement had been reached on calendar year 1964 force goals for the RVNAF, Civil Guard and the National Police, although there was not yet an agreement on the SDC and Combat Youth. The agreement on the RVNAF, CG, and SDC force levels were as shown in the tabulation below 77 Current Authorized Strength Recommended Strength CY 64 Amount Increase Estimated Cost RVNAF 227,000 237,600 10,600 1. GVN = 1.4 billion.piastres 2. U.S. = $18 million for pay; $5 million MAP Civil Guard 90,015 97,615 7,600 1.8 billion piastres 2 .$ 2.2 million MAP (no estimate of cost of pay increase) SDC 110,000 110,000 No estimates of cost (no agreement yet) Combat Youth 180,000 (trained) 80-90,000 (trained and 200,000 armed) 20,000 No estimates of cost (no agreement yet) National Police 24,250 34,900 10,650 500,000 million piastres $1.2 million With respect to the perennial problem of assisting the Vietnamese to develop their own offensive guerrilla force, in mid-May there was some progress to report, although the accomplishments were less than had been hoped. Efforts were continuing to improve the distribution of Ranger battalions for use against VC base areas and in border areas of I and II Corps. Plans also were being developed at that time for better border control, and for intelligence integration, coordination of Vietnamese Special Forces operations, and air surveillance. Efforts were also being made towards integration of Vietnamese Special Forces and U.S. Special Forces staffs at all command echelons. Vietnamese junior officers and NCO's, including Montagnards, were being initiated to training and guerrilla warfare techniques in the new VNSFUSSF Center at Nha Trang. This was   64, expected to encourage the VNSF to adopt bolder and more confident tactics. 78 Recommendations 8, 9, and 10 were accomplished rather simply and ex-peditiously because they consisted entirely of supiJlying the South Vietnamese materials that they needed. It did not involve our inducing the Vietnamese themselves to do anything. Recommandation 8 was to provide the Vietnamese Air Force 25 AlH aircraft in exchange for present T-28s. Recom- mendation 9 was to provide the Vietnamese army additional M-113 AFC's (with-drawing the M-114s there), additional riverboats and approximately $5-10 million worth of additional materiel. Recommendation 10 was to announce publicly the fertilizer program and to expand it with a view to trebling within two years the amount of fertilizer currently made available. MAP funding for Recommendation 8 was approved by ISA on 25 March 1964 following approval of the delivery schedule on 22 March. On 1 May 1964, 19 AlH's were delivered and six more scheduled for delivery 10 days later. A Navy unit of 4 support officers, 8 instruction pilots and 150 men arrived on 30 April 1964 to train Vietnamese crews until thcy could assume full responsibility, which was estimated to be in three to six months. By early May planning and funding action for the provision of the M-l13's had been completed. According to the schedule developed in response to the request for this materiel made by CINCPAC and COMUSMACV, 17 M-H3's were shipped to arrive in Saigon 17 April, 16 were due to arrive 29 April, 30 were shipped to arrive by 1 June, and 30 more were to arrive by 10 July. There was an agreement between CINCPAC and COMUSMACV that no additional howitzers, river-boats or ANPRC41s were to be recommended at that time. Eighty-five thousand tons of fertilizer had been requested and procured by early May for spring planting, and this had been publicized by the GVN and in washing-ton. A distribution scheme was being developed and refined in early May with provision for further expansion including a probable 18,000 tons re-quirement in the fall. 79 There were two important visitations to Saigon during April. The first was by General Earle G. wheeler, then Chief of Staff, USA, who visited Saigon from 15-20 April and represented Secretary McNamara and the JCS during the visit of the Secretary of State to Saigon 17-20 April. It was during these meetings that Khanh's desire to shift the emphasis of the struggle to an attack on the North first became emphatically evident. In the meeting with Khanh on 16 April, Wheeler, in company with General Harkins, was in-formed by Khanh that eventually the war must be moved north. Harkins later told Wheeler that this was the first time Khanh had ever said that extending operations to the North was inevitable. Khanh explained that when the move to the North .occurred, MACV would have to take over all the logistics. He further said he was ready to start planning for an extension of operations to the North. 65 . Two days later on 18 April Khanh again brought the matter up, this time with Secretary of State Rusk. Rusk replied that this was a big prob-lem, that political preparation would be needed, and that while the U.S. was prepared to take any action necessary to win the war, it had to be very clear that such action was indeed necessary before the U.S. would embark on it. 80 A fortnight before on 4 April 1964 W. P. Bundy had written a letter to Ambassador Lodge with enclosures which concerned a possible political scen-ario to support action against North Vietnam and for the earlier, so-called "Blue Annex" (considerations of extended actions to the North) completed during the McNamara-Taylor visit in March 1964. In Washington there was considerable theorizing, in this period, about the best manner of persuading North Vietnam to cease aid to the NLF-VC by forceful but restrained pres-sures which would convey the threat of greater force if the North Vietnamese did not end their support of the insurgency in South Vietnam. In certain circles in Washington at least, there was what appears now to have been an amazing level of confidence that we could induce the North Vietnamese to abandon their support of the SVN insurgency if only we could convince them that we meant business, and that we would indeed bomb them if they did not stop their infiltration of men and supplies to the South. This confidence, although ultimately accepted as the basis for decision, was neither universal nor unqualified. This was evident, for instance in the meeting of 1.9 April, when the subject was discussed in Saigon with Rusk, Lodge, Harkins, Nes, Manfull, DeSilva, Lt. Col. Dunn, General Wheeler, W. P. Bundy, and Solbert of ISA. Much of the discussion on that occasion centered on the political context, objectives, and risks, of increasing mili-tary pressure on North Vietnam. It was understood that it would be first exerted solely by the Government of Vietnam, and would be clandestine. Gradually both wraps and restraints would be removed. A point on which there was a good deal of discussion was what contact with the DRV would be best in order to let Hanoi know the meaning of the pressures and of the threats of greater pressures. Ambassador Lodge favored a Canadian ICC man who was about to replace the incumbent. The new man he had known at the UN. While Imdge was willing to participate in discussions of the mechanisms, he was explicitly unsure of Hanoi's reaction to any level of pressure. Lodge was not always fully consistent in his views on this subject, and it is not clear that his reservations on this score led him to counsel against the move or to express other cautions. However, he did say he doubted that we could meet massive intervention by the DRV by purely conventional measures. Rusk hoped that the threatened pressures against Hanoi would induce her to end her support for the VC. Rusk emphasized the importance of obtaining the strongest possible evidence of DRV infiltration. It was during this discussion that the ques-tion of the introduction of U.S. Naval forces and hints of Cam Ranh Bay arose as a measure which it was hoped would induce increased caution in Hanoi. The presence of military power there, it was hoped, might induce Hanoi to be more restrained in its actions toward South Vietnam. There was 66 . speculation about whether the use of nuclear weapons against North Vietnam would bring in the Russians. Rusk had.been impressed, so he said, by Chiang Kai-sheks recent, strongly expressed opposition to any use by the United States of nuclear weapons. There was mention that Khiem had sought Chinese Nationalist military forces but their utility was generally deprecated. Bundy conjectured, for argument's sake, that nukes used in wholly unpopulated areas solely for purposes of interdiction might have a different significance than if used otherwise. It is not reported that any examination of effectiveness or of obviously possible countermeasures was essayed; and no decisions were made. But the direction of thinking was clearly away from measures internal to Vietnam, and clearly headed toward military actions against the North. 81 At the conclusion of his visit to Vietnam in mid-April Secretary Rusk drew up the two-part summary list of added steps that he believed necessary. The first part, composed of actions presenting no substantive policy problems listed the following actions 1. Engage more flags in South Vietnam. 2. Increase GVN diplomatic representation, and GVN information activity (to widen support of the GVN cause). 3 Enlist General Minh in the war effort. 4. Mobilize public support for war effort by civilian groups. 5- Improve the psychological warfare effort. 6. Discreetly cooperate with Khanh for the expulsion of "undesirable characters." 7 Etapower Ambassador Lodge to make on-the-spot promotions to U.S. civilians in Vietnam. Among the actions the Secretary felt should be considered, but which in-volved policy problems, were 1. Maintain U.S. naval presence at either Tourane or Cam Ranh Bay, as a signal to Hanoi (to suggest to them our deep interest in affairs in Vietnam). 2. Spend more money in developing pacified provinces instead of concentrating efforts almost exclusively on trouble spots. 3. Push GVN anti-junk operations gradually north of the DMZ. 674. Remove inhibitions on the use of Asian intelligence agents in Cambodian-Laos border areas. 82 By the end of another fortnight Khanh's mood had turned much more strongly toward insistence upon his march to the North. On the morning of 4 May 1964, Khanh asked Lodge to call, and Khanh began by asking if he should make a declaration putting the country on a war footing. This, he said would involve getting rid of "politicians" in the government and having a government composed frankly of technicians. It would involve sus-pension of civil rights ("as had been the case under Lincoln in your civil war"). There would be a curfew, Saigon would cease to be a city of pleasure, and plans laid to evacuate the diplomatic corps and two million people. Khanh then said that an announcement should be made to Hanoi that any further interference with South Vietnams internal affairs would lead to reprisals, and Khanh specifically asked if the U.S. would be prepared to undertake tit-for-tat bombing each time there was such interference. Continuing, Khanh talked further, somewhat wildly, of defying Cambodia and breaking diplomatic relations with France; and he even mentioned a declaration of war against the DRV at one point. He conveyed the impres-sion of a desperate desire to press for an early military decision by out-right war with the DRw Lodge sought to'discourage this sort of adventur-ism, but acknowledged that if the DRV invaded South Vietnam with its Army, that act would raise a host of new questions of acute interest to the U.S. Possible entry of Chinese forces would have to be considered. The question then would be whether such an Army could be made ineffective by interdicting its supply lines. He could not envision the U.S. putting into Asia an Army the size of the U.S. Army in Europe in World War II. Khanh said that he understood this but that an "Army Corps" of U.S. Special Forces numbering 10,000 could do in Asia as much as an Army group had done in Europe. "One American can make soldiers out of 10 Orientals."Sici It was illogical, wasteful, and wrong to go on incurring casualties "just in order to make the agony endure." Near the end of his report of this conversation, the Ambassador in-serted this comment, "this man obviously wants to get on with the job and not sit here indefinitely taking casualties. Who can blame him?" Then he added, as a further comment His desire to declare a state of war...seems wholly in line with our desire to get out of a 'business as usual mentally. He is clearly facing up to all the hard questions and wants us to do it, too. 83 Lodges report of Khanhs impatient wish to strike north drew an immediate flash response from Rusk, which began with a statement that made it clear that the message had been considered carefully at the White House. Extremely grave issues were raised by the conversation, and reactions had TOP SECREI?  68 .By NWD Date 201 1 to be developed with great care. There would still be another meeting with the President on the matter, on 6 fey, before McNamara departed for the trip that would take him to Saigon (after Bonn). McNamara would take up issues with Lodge upon his arrival there. But before the 6 May meeting with the President, would Lodge please answer seven questions as a contri-bution to the Washington consideration of the issue. The questions raised by the Secretary and the answers provided later by the Embassy follow 1. What were Khanhs motivations? Does he believe that mobiliza-tion makes sense only as a preparation for military action against North Vietnam? Reply Khanh as professional soldier thinks in terms of victory. Not a matter of pique. Honestly seeking a means of putting country on war footing. 2. Is there a trace of despair in Khanhs remarks? Does he think he can win without attacking north? Reply No. 3 Previously Khanh told McNamara it would be necessary to con-solidate a base in South Vietnam for attacking North Vietnam. Previous counterguerrilia experience in Greece, Malaya., and Korea supports this judgment. Reply Khanh does not want to move regard-less of progress in the South. 4. Khanh's talk of evacuating seems fantastic. Reply Agree. Khanh's concern was an ability to administer the city if attacked. (This referred to Khanhs discussion of evacuating the city.) 5 Were Khanhs talks of warning to Hanoi and Cambodia and action against the French integral parts of mobilization? Reply Yes. But he should have evidence against French nationals. 6. How to interpret Khanh's remarks about U.S. "Army Corps?" Reply Loose talk. Tills reaction came after (Lodges) discouraging reply about the possibility of the U.S. bringing in large numbers of forces. 7 was the GVN capable of administering limited mobilization? Reply Question is a puzzler. However, some such thing might be a way of overcoming "business as usual." 84 The response to Khanhs proposal that came out of the 6 May meeting was that the 'Secretary of Defense was to tell Khanh, when he was in Saigon, that the U.S. did "not intend to provide military support nor undertake the military objective of rolling back Communist control in North Vietnam." 85 69, 3 The Secretarys Visit to Saigon May 1964 Accompanied by General wheeler, and MM. Sylvester and McNaughton, and his military aide, the Secretary of Defense made a brief visit to Saigon 12-14 May enroute home from Bonn. In informing Saigon on 4 May of his projected visit he said that his primary objective was to get full information as to the current status and future plans, with targets and dates, for the following items for the rest of calendar year 1964 1. Augmentation of GVN military and paramilitary forces, with a breakdown by area and service category. 2. Increased compensation for GVN military and paramilitary personnel. 3. Reorganization of military and paramilitary forces. 4. Creation of the Civil Administrative Corps. 5 Implementation of the national mobilization plan. 6. The steps and timetables, both military and civil, for our implementation of the oil-spot concept of pacification. Additionally, it was further specified that he wanted information on the following 1. A map of population and areas controlled by the VC and the GVN. 2. Progress of military operations in extending control by the oil-spot theory. 3 Brief reports on the critical provinces. 4. The Country Teams appraisal of Khanh's progress in strength-ening national, provincial and district governments. 5. The Country Teams evaluation of Khanh1s support by various groups (constituting Vietnamese political power centers). 6. MACVs forecast of likely VC and GVN military activity for the rest of 1964. 7. Recommendations on cross-border intelligence operations. 8. Report on the extent to which the U.S. contribution of added resources or personnel (either military or civilian) for civil pro-grams could strengthen the GVN counterinsurgency program. 86 70 ., The trip books prepared for the members of the Secretarys party also indicated that one major concern was to reinforce Lodges demarche of 30 April concerning facilitating the flow of piastres to the provinces for counterinsurgency support. It was suggested that possibly the rigid and conservative director of the budget, Luu Van Tinh might have to be dis-missed if Oanh couldn't make him do better. A list of problems that were created by lack of piastres in the provinces followed 1. Health workers trained by AID were not employed for lack of piastres. 2. Provincial and district officers (both health and agricultural extension workers) were severely restricted in travel to villages for lack of per diem and gasoline. 3 Bills for handling AID counterinsurgency cargo at the port of Danang were not paid, resulting in refusal and threat of refusal, by workers and groups, to handle more cargo. 4. Several categories of GVN workers had not been paid salaries owed to them for months. 5- Truckers were threatening to refuse to handle AID counter-insurgency cargo because they had not been paid for past services by the Government of Vietnam. 6. There were inadequate funds to compensate villages for food, lodging, water and services provided by peasants to the ARVN, the CG, and the SDC. 7 There had been nonpayment or delayed or only partial payment of promised relocation allowances to relocated authorities. In the light of these problems it was considered that two USOM piastre cash funds might be established; (1) a petty cash fund to support the Ministry of Education; and (2) a substantial USOM-controlled piastre fund to break bottlenecks in such matters as transportation of goods, spare parts, per diem payment of immob-i 1 i zed Vietnamese personnel, and emergency purchases on the local market. AID Administrator Bell in Washington had made commitments to Secretary McNamara that all piastres necessary for counterinsurgency would be forthcoming even if deficit financing were needed. But because there were plenty of commodity imports at hand, that posed no problem. USOM and MACV and the public administration advisors who were then being recruited should review carefully whether U.S. civil administra-tion advisors to the provincial chiefs could facilitate the flow of funds and commodities, and expedite paper work. Finally, the use of rural affairs provincial staffs should be increased by one or more per province, perhaps using Filipinos or Chinese Nationals. 87 71 . The first day of the Secretarys stay in Saigon was spent in briefings, and not all of what he heard was encouraging. There was first a briefing from the Ambassador, who said the administrative mechanism of the central GVN was not functioning smoothly, that Khanh overcentralized authority, and that although the situation might work out the prospects were not good. One bit of encouragement was that Khanh was requesting more U.S. advisors this was taken as a token of good intentions and of willingness to cooperate with the U.S. The provincial government would continue to be weak, and the corps commanders authority handicapped the provinces. Khanhs 23 new province chiefs and 80 new district chiefs had improved the quality of leadership, he thought. But the Buddhists, although fragmented, remained politically active and Thich Tri Quang was agitating strongly against Khanh. The Catholics were about to withdraw their chaplains from the Army. The students supported Khanh but the intellectuals did not. Lodge thought that the current U.S. program was of about the right size but that better leadership was needed. He would like U.S. civilian advisors in each corps area, when USOM Director Brent gave his briefing he made the point that USOM was 25 percent short of authorized personnel strength. This led the Secretary to ask about the use of U.S. military personnel, FSOs, or Peace Corps personnel to fill the shortage. Forrestal was asked to look into the problem and report. The NIA was short of faculty because seven instructors had been assigned elsewhere and there was, moreover, an inadequate budget. 88 In the afternoon briefing, Gen eral Harkins said he was guardedly opti-miistic in spite of the fact that 23 province chiefs, 135 district chiefs, and practically all senior military commanders had been replaced since the last coup. In discussing "Population Control" (pacification), it was decided to use 1 April 1964 as a base for statistical measurements of pacification progress. When he came to the subject of the planned augmentation of ARVN and the paramilitary forces, the figures presented by General Harkins showed that achievement lagged behind the agreed goals. Although the agreed MAP program called for 229,000 RVNAF1 personnel at that time and 238,000 for the end of calendar year 1964, there were actually only 207,000 currently in RVNAF. (This showed no improvement over March). The strength of RVNAF had in fact been decreasing consistently from a high of 218,000 in July 1963 because of increased activity (hence losses through casualties), desertions, budget problems and miscellaneous lesser causes. 89 Among the topics receiving considerable attention during the meeting on the morning of the 13th of May was that of VNAF pilot training program. This subject assumed special importance for three reasons. First, the March program of providing helicopters to the Vietnamese Air Force called also for the provision of pilots to fly them. Second, there had just previously been some embarrassing publicity concerning the participation of USAF pilots in covert combat roles, an activity that had not been publicly acknowledged. Third, the meeting with the President on 6 May had led to the instructions to the Secretary, already noted, to discourage Khanhs hopes of involving the United States in his March to the North. 72 . In this discussion of VNAF pilot training, it was revealed that there were 496 VNAF pilots currently at hand, but that 666 were require y u V Thirty helicopter pilots were to finish by 1 July, 30 liaison P1 0 finish by 27 June, and 226 cadet pilots were in the United States whose status was not known at the time of the meeting. The ecre ary emp a rz that it had never been intended that the USAF participate in com a m Vietnam, and current practices that belied this were exceptions o a policy. The Administration had been embarrassed because o e fair--1etters which had complained that U.S. boys were being. 1 e 1 combat while flying inferior aircraft. The Secretary emplao.ze 1 VNAF' should have a better pilot-to-aircraft ratio. It.should be d to instead of 1.4 to 1 as at present. And, as a first prion y ptojec ,pilots should transition from other aircraft to the A-lHo o 1 mg e total to 150 qualified to fly that aircraft. It was tentatively agree to. fix that objective for 120 days and accept the consequen g transport capability. 90 Following this there was a discussion of offensive guerrilla operations and cross-border operations, both of which were agreed to e ina equCreation of an offensive guerrilla force had been one 01 le ecle March recommendations. General Westmoreland said that pecia orc ... both the U.S. and the GVN were over-extended, and he adde le e lev they should be expanded. As a result of this conversation waf +nr,v to study the six-month duty tour of the U.S. Special Folces. e,," considered it possibly too short and thought it might have o e eto a full year. On the subject of cross-border operations, .e concepto drop six-man teams in each of authorized areas in Nort re nam an and pick them up, 30 days later, by helicopter. The objective Vt teams by 15 June; and this potential was to be doubled eac mon n ,, 'It was decided that operations should begin approximately 5 'unc 0 In his subsequent report on this second SecDef-MACV conference, liACV reported that the Secretary of Defense had expressed disappoin men a the civil defense decree of the GVN did not constitute a counselpai bO military conscription. Furthermore, MACV recorded that in t e course 0 the discussion of means of strengthening the VNAF the Secretary o. e ene had reaffirmed basic U.S. policy that fighting in Vietnam should be done by Vietnamese. The FARMGATE concept was explained as a specific, reluc-tantly approved exception, a supplementary effort transitory in na ure. The Secretarys military aide, Lt. Col. Sidney B. Beny, Jr., recorded the decisions taken by the Secretary at Saigon. They were thee. 1. -Have the first group of six-man reconnaissance teams for cross-border operations ready to operate by 15 June l ', cn F e the number of teams each month thereafter. The Secietary anxxouo to get hard information on DRV aid to the VC. The Secretary was to 73 . get authority for additional cross-border operations in addition to the operations already authorized in two locations. 2. Concerning the VNAF training program, there was never any intent, nor was it the policy of the USG to have USAF pilots parti-'cipate in combat. Exception to this should be considered undesirable and not setting a precedent. MACV was therefore to give first priority to manning 75 AlHs with two Vietnamese pilots per aircraft, for a total of 150 Vietnamese pilots; and he was also to determine the optimum size of the VNAF', tentatively using a figure of 125 to 150 A1H air-craft. In connection with this the Secretary approved assignment to the VNAF of 25 more AlHs by 1 October 1964 to replace 18 RT-28s on hand. 3. When the Secretary asked Harkins if he needed additional Special Forces, Harkins replied, "Yes." The Secretary then said that when COMUSMACV stated requirements he would approve them if they were valid. He said that a six-month duty tour was too short and the normal tour should be extended to one year, reserving the right, of course, to make exceptions for special cases. 4. When General Harkins handed the Secretary a shopping list for items and funds totalling about $7 million, the Secretary immediately approved the list. 5. The Secretary directed COMUSMACV to submit in writing require-ments for South Vietnamese military housing. 6. Concerning MACV needs, the "SecDef made unequivocal statement that MACV should not hesitate to ask for anything they need. SecDef gives first priority to winning the war in SVN. If necessary he will take weapons and equipment from U.S. forces to give the VNAF. Nothing will be spared to win the war. But U.S. personnel must operate in compliance with USG policies and objectives. " 93 Near the end of the Secretarys stay General Khanh met with McNamara, Lodge, Taylor and Harkins; and judging from the report of the meeting sent in by the Ambassador, Khanh put on a masterful performance. Khanh began his talk by reviewing the recent course of the war claiming to have estab-lished control, in the last three months, over some three million Vietnamese citizens sic However, the danger of reinfiltration by the Communists still existed. Khanh said that the biggest and most time-consuming prob- lems were political, and he was unskilled in such things and wanted to lean for advice on Ambassador Lodge. But religious problems were also pressing. There was religious conflict between Catholics and Buddhists and within the Buddhist movement. The Government of Vietnam was in the middle. The real trouble-maker was Thich Tri Quang. Lodge was trying to help Khanh in this. There was also a problem with the press, and with "parlor politi-cians" (civilians). Khanh said that he was a soldier, not a politician,and wished he could spend his time mounting military operations and in planning long-term strategy instead of dealing with political intrigues and squabbles. But he had to think about the security of his regime. The Secretary then referred to the Ambassadors report of Khanhs desire not to "prolong the agony," and said that he, the Secretary, wanted to hear more about this, Khanh said that in speaking of not wanting to "make the agony endure" he did not mean he would lose patience, but rather wanted to speed up the effort by something like a proclamation that South Vietnam was being attacked from the north and was therefore being put on a war footing. The statement would also say that if this attack from the north did not stop within a specified period of time, South Vietnam would strike back in ways and degrees comparable to the North Vietnamese attacks on South Vietnam. whereas the north attacks us with guerrillas that squirm through the jungle, we would attack them with guerrillas of our own, only ours would fly at treetop level and blow up key installations or mine the Port of Haiphong. The Secretary asked in return if Khanh judged it wise to start operations at that time. Khanh replied that he needed first to consider the enemys probable reaction, including the reaction of Communist China. The NIF and VC were only arms and hands of the monster whose head was in Hanoi "and maybe further north." To destroy the thing it was necessary to strike the head. The purpose of going on a war footing was to prepare for ultimate extension of the war to the north. Taylor asked how best to attack the North. It had been noted that small-scale operations had had no success, with respect to RVNAF capabilities, Khanh said that they either were equal to the task already, or soon would bethe problem was to be sure of enjoying full U.S. support. Khanh conceded that there were always unknowns that created uncertainties. Taylor recalled that in March Khanh had favored holding off the attack on North Vietnam until there was a stabler base in South Vietnam. Khanh hedged on this point at first; then, after conceding some GVN weakness, said an attack on the North was the best way to cure that weakness. It would be a cure for weakness to draw clear lines of battle and thereby engage mens hearts in an all-out effort. The Secretary at a later point reminded Khanh of the 72,00O-man increase in ARVN, and another 72,000-man increase in paramilitary forces, that had been agreed upon in March; and pointed out that accomplishments in April did not suggest that the GVN was on schedule. The Secretary'emphasized he made the observation only to introduce his main point, which was that the U.S. Government would help in any way it could to get the program back on schedule. Then he produced a cnart showing what should have been achieved and what actually had been achieved. Tile USG would supply any needed funds, and fighter-type aircraft, but the 0717 must emphasize to the provinces that program funds must be disbursed. Khanh blamed 75 . the piastre disbursal difficulties on inherited French budget practices, and promised to pressure the province chiefs further on the matter. There was talk about incompetent personnel within the GVN and of the problems of replacing them.'4. The Honolulu Conference of 30 May 1964 The next landmark of policy formation for Vietnam was the Honolulu Conference of 30 May 1964. On 26 May, the President sent out to Lodge his call for the Honolulu Conference I have been giving the most intense consideration to the whole battle for Southeast Asia, and I have now instructed Dean Rusk, Bob McNamara, Max Taylor and John McCone to join Felt in Honolulu for a meeting with you and a very small group of your most senior associates in Southeast Asia to review for my final approval a series of plans for effective action.,I am sending you this message at once to give you private advance notice because I hope this meeting can occur very soon -perhaps on Monday. Dean Rusk will be sending you tomorrow a separate cable on the subjects proposed for the meeting, and Bob McNamara will put a plane at your disposal for the trip... Other parts of the message referred to matters related to impending changes in the mission in Saigonthe retirement of General Harkins and his replacement by General Westmoreland and the strengthening of the civilian side of the country team. 95 The promised policy guidance followed promptly. It constituted both an appraisal of the current situation and a statement of the needs -flowing from that appraisalthat it seemed evident had to be met, along with some proposals for meeting those needs. I. You will have surmised from yesterday's telegram from the President and the Secretary that we here are fully aware that gravest decisions are in front of us and other governments about free worlds interest in and commitment to security of Southeast Asia. Our point of departure is and must be that we cannot accept overrunning of Southeast Asia by Hanoi and Peiping. Full and frank discussion of these decisions with you is purpose of Honolulu meeting... 2. President will continue in close consultation with Congressional leadership (he met with Democratic leadership and Senate Republicans yesterday) and will wish Congress associated with him on any steps which carry with them substantial acts and risks of escalation. At that point there will be three central questions 76 . a. Is the security of Southeast Asia vital to the U.S. and of the free world? b. Are additional steps necessary? c. Will the additional steps accomplish their mission of stopping the intrusions of Hanoi and Peiping into the south? whether approached from b or c above, it seems obvious that we must do everything within our power to stiffen and strengthen the situation in South Vietnam. We recognize that...the time sequence of Communist actions may force the critical decisions before any such preparatory measures could achieve tangible success. II. Nevertheless, in Honolulu, we would like you...to be prepared to discuss with us several proposals...perhaps the most radical...is the one which...would involve a major infusion of U.S. efforts into a group of selected provinces where Vietnamese seem currently unable to execute their pacification programs... we would therefore propose that U.S. personnel, both civilian and military, drawn from the U.S. establishment currently in Vietnam, be encadred into current Vietnamese political and military structure... Specifically, this would involve the assignment of civilian personnel, alternatively military personnel with a civilian function, to work in the provincial administration, and insofar as it is feasible, down to the logistic level of administration. On the military side it would mean the introduction of mobile training teams to train, stiffen and improve the state of the Vietnamese paramilitary forces and district operation planning... In order to test the utility of such a proposal, we would suggest that seven provinces be chosen for this purpose. We would offer the provinces of Long An, Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, Tay Ninh, Hau Ngiah, which are five critical provinces in the immediate vicinity of Saigon. Additionally, we would propose Quang Ngia and finally Phu Yen ...U.S. personnel assigned to these functions would not appear directly in the chain of command They would instead be listed as "assistants" to the Vietnamese officials. In practice, however, we would expect them to carry a major share of the burden of decision and action... 77 . ...This proposal might also require a close integration of U.S. and Vietnamese pacification activities in Saigon..,.. III. In addition to these radical proposals...we continue gravely concerned about the differences between Khanh and the generals, the problem of Big Minh, and the religious differences Iw Finally, we wish to consult with you on the manner in which we can... eliminate the business as usual attitude in Saigon we will also wish to examine the best means of reducing the problems of dependents 96 On the same day that the foregoing policy guidance went out to Arnbas-sador Lodge, a meeting was held in Washington at William Sullivans sugges-tion. Attended by Mr. McGeorge Bundy, John McNaughton, General Goodpastor and William Colby, it considered a policy memo drawn up by Mr. Mendenhall covering most of the same points raised in the message to Lodge. The gist of the memo was that the GVN was not operating effectively enough to reverse the adverse trend of the war against the VC, that the Khanh government was well intentioned but its good plans were not being translated into effec-tive action, and that it was necessary therefore to find means of broadening the U.S. role in Vietnam in order to infuse efficiency into the operations of the GVN. In general, the memo argued the U.S. should become more deeply involved both militarily and otherwise, abandoning the passive advisor role but avoiding visibility as a part of the chain of command. Vietnamese sensitivities imposed limitations, and if it should appear that the United States intruded, the Vietnamese might come to resent our presence. The memo proposed, nevertheless, that the meeting carefully consider a phased expan-sion of the U.S. role. First, military advisors might be placed in para-military units in seven provinces about 300 added advisors would be needed for this purpose. Second, in the same seven provinces -- Long An, Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, Tay Ninh, Hau Ngiah, Quany Ngia, and Phu Yen U.S. civilian and military personnel.should be interlarded in the civil administration, about 10 per province for a total of 70. Third, as an experiment, the U.S. might try civilians at district levels to supplement the U.S. military personnel being assigned there. "In view of the traditional distrust of the Vietnam-ese peasants for military personnel, it is of considerable importance to begin an introduction of American civilian presence at this level to help win support of the peasant population." To back up these field opera- tions it was suggested that a joint Vietnamese-American Pacification Opera-tions Committee be established, with high level representation from MACV and USOM on the U.S. side, and from the Defense Ministry, the Joint General Staff (JGS), the Vice President for Pacification, and the Directorate of the Budget and Foreign Aid on the Vietnamese side. This Joint Pacification Operations Committee should be concerned not with policy but with implementation of policies. (This was judged the weak side of the GVN.) U.S. personnel might, in addition, be introduced at reasonably high levels into the Ministries of Rural Affairs, Interior, Information, Education, Health,Public Works, and, in fact, into any other agency concerned with pacifica-tion. Finally, the U.S. personnel so assigned should come from among those Americans already on the spot -- partly from civilians and partly from military officers already on assignment there and the vacancies caused by these reassignments should be filled by recruitment from the U.S. 97 A cable from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs to CINCPAC and COMUSMACV indicated that (in addition to some questions on Laos) the Secretary of Defense wanted the views of the two senior commanders in the Pacific (CINCPAC and MACV) on a series of questions largely but not exclusively military in nature 1. What military actions, in ascending order of gravity, might be taken to impress Hanoi with our intentions to strike North Vietnam? f 2. What would be the time factors and force requirements involved in achieving readiness for such actions against North Vietnam? 3 what should be the purpose and pattern of the initial air strike against North Vienam? 4. What was their concept of the actions and reactions which might arise from progressive implementation of CINCPAC plans 37-64 and 32-64? 5. How might North Vietnam and Communist China respond to these escalating pressures? 6. What military help should be sought from SEATO nations? There was a second group of queries which referred not to the possibility of military pressures of one sort or another against North Vietnam, but rather were directed mainly to the counterinsurgency efforts within South Vietnam. 1. what were their views on providing four-man advisory teams, at once, for each district in the seven selected provinces, and later in all of the 239 districts in SVN? 4 2. In what other ways could military personnel be used to advan-tage in forwarding the pacification program in the seven selected provinces?,3- What was the current status of a. The proposed increase in regular and paramilitary forces of the GVN, including the expansion of the VNAF, the reorganization 79 .  of paramilitary forces and the increased compensation for GVN military forces? b. Formation of an intelligence net of U.S. advisors' re-porting on conditions in the RVNAF? c. Development of a capability for offensive guerrilla operations? d. Progress under decrees for national mobilization? e. Progress in detailing and in carrying out operational plans for clear-hold operations (the oil-spot concept)? 98 Along with the solicitation of opinion from COMUSMACV and CINCPAC, summary proposals were developed by SACSA on the "feasibility of strength-ening RVNAF, CG and SDC by increased advisory efforts andor encadrement." SACSA's proposals, intended for consideration at the Honolulu meeting, centered on three subjects. The first elaborated a concept which was called "U.S. Advisory Assistance to the Vietnamese Civil Guard" which consisted of a phased program of U.S. detachments at the district level to provide oper-ational assistance to paramilitary forces. About one and one-half years (or until the end of calendar year 1965) would be needed to expand the current effort -- which consisted of two-man teams for only 13 districts --to 239 districts with larger advisory teams (one officer and 3 NCO spe-cialists). Thus, by the end of 1965, according to this plan, approximately 1,000 men would be assigned to the districts. To support this effort in the districts about 500 more personnel would be needed, raising the total to 1500. The limiting factor on this effort would be a shortage of inter-pretors. The second program proposed for consideration by SACSA was a "Pilot Program for Provision of Advisory Assistance to Paramilitary Forces in Seven Provinces." This was directed exclusively to the seven critical provinces, namely, Long An, Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, Hau Nghia, Tay Ninh, Quang Ngai and Pnu Yen. The concept in this case was to assign one advisory detachment with one company grade officer and three NCOs to each of the 49 districts in the seven provinces. In addition to this total of 200 persons, a 35 percent manpower overhead slice plus some augmentation at the province level (70 + 30) would be required. This would mean about 100 men in addition to the 4 x 49 in the districts, or an overall total of about 300. In addition, a minimum of 49 interpretors would be needed. The third proposal for discussion was a suggestion that U.S. advisors be placed at company level in regular ARVN units. In investigating this proposal, CINCPAC, COMUSMACV and advisors on the spot had been asked their judgment, and all were reported to believe that this extension of advisors'' 80 . to company level was not necessary, and that the current advisory structure to ARVN was adequate. The problem areas cited in all of these proposals to extend the advisory system were the questionable acceptability to the Vietnamese of further intrusion by American advisors, the shortage of interpreters, and finally the inevitable increase in U.S. casualties. 99 The political problems demanding solutions in order to permit the GVN to proceed effectively in its struggle against the VC were identified in the U.S. preparations for the Honolulu Conference as a. The disposition of the senior political and military prisomers from the two coups (there was resentment by some groups over the detention of prisomers at Dalat; on the other hand, there was possible danger to the Khanh regime if they were released). b. The rising religious tension both Catholic and Buddhist. c. The split between Buddhists under Thich Tam Chau (moderates) and under Thich Tri Quang (extremists). d. Petty politicking within the GVN. e. GVN failure to provide local lectures. f. GVN failure to appoint Ambassadors to key governments. g. Inadequate GVN arrangements to handle third country aid. h. RVNAF failure to protect the population. 100 It was not within the competence of the Honolulu Conference to come to any decisions concerning the touchy matter of additional pressures against the North; this could be done only at the white House level. Agreement was reached, however, on certain specific actions to be taken with respect to the critical provinces and very shortly after the return of major participants to Washington these actions were approved and instructions were sent to the field accordingly. On 5 June the Department notified the Embassy in Saigon that actions agreed upon at Honolulu were to be taken with respect to the critical provinces as follows 1. Move in added South Vietnamese troops to assure numerical superiority over the VC. 81 . 2. Assign control over all troops in each province to the province chief. 3. Execute clear-and-hold operations on a hamlet-by-hamlet basis following the "oil spot" theory for each of the approxi-mately 40 districts within the seven critical provinces. 4. Introduce population control programs (curfews, ID papers, intelligence networks, etc.). 5 Increase the number of provincial police. 6. Expand the information program. 7- Develop special economic programs for each province. 8. Add U.S. personnel as follows a. 320 military advisors in provinces and districts. b. 40 USOM advisors in provinces and districts. c. 74 battalion advisors (2 for each of 37 battalions). 434 TOTAL 9- Transfer military personnel as needed to fill USOM shortages. 10. Establish joint USGVN teams to monitor the program at both National and Provincial levels. 101 5- Preparation for Increased Pressure on North Vietnam The critical question of pressures against North Vietnam remained theoretically moot. The consensus of those formulating policy proposals for final approval by highest authority appears to have been that these pressures would have to be resorted to sooner or later. But the subject was politically explosive, especially in a presidential election year. Accordingly, not only did the basic foreign policy issues involved need careful exploration, but the domestic political framework needed prepara-tion before any binding commitments to serious actions could be decided upon. On 15 June 19611, McGeorge Bundy addressed a memorandum to the Secre-taries of State and Defense announcing a meeting in the Secretary of State's conference room that same day at 600 p.m. The principal question for discussion will be to assess the desirability of recommending to the President that a Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia should be sought promptly. 82The second question is what the optimum recommenda-tion for action should be if in fact a congressional resolution is not recommended. 102 There were six enclosures included for the consideration of those attending the conference. The first was a memorandum on the subject of "Elements of a Southeast Asia Policy That Does Not Include a Con-gressional Resolution". The second was a Sullivan memorandum sum-marizing the current situation in South Vietnam. The third was a memorandum by W. P. Bundy dated 12 June 1964 on "Probable Develop-ments and the Case for Congressional Resolution on Southeast Asia." The fourth was a draft resolution on Southeast Asia for Congressional approval. The fifth suggested basic themes to be employed in present-ing the resolution to the Congress. The sixth and last consisted of a long series of questions and answers regarding the resolution of the public relations sort that it was thought should surround the effort. The proposed "Elements of a Policy That Does Not Include a Con-gressional Resolution" consisted largely of an elaboration of the covert measures that were already either approved or nearing approval. This included RECCE STRIKE and T-28 Operations all over Laos and small-scale RECCE STRIKE Operations in North Vietnam after appropriate provocation. Apparently the sequence of actions was thought of as beginning with VNAF Operations in the Laotian corridor, followed by limited air and sea deployments of U.S. forces toward Southeast Asia, and still more limited troop movements in that general area. Military actions were to be accompanied by political actions which would maximize diplomatic support for Laos and maximize the support and visible presence of allies in Saigon. This last was explicitly stated to be particularly desired by "higher authority. Diplomatic moves, it was hoped, would also intensify support of Souvanna. In Vietnam, the paper argued, we should emphasize the critical province program, strengthen the Country Team, shift the U.S. role from advice to direc-tion, discourage emphatically any further coup plots, and give energetic support to Khanh. In the U.S. there should be expanded publicity for opposition to both aggressive adventure and withdrawal. It is probably significant that the last words of this study were that "this outline does not preclude a shift to a higher level of action, if actions of other side should justify or require it. It does assume that in the absence of such drastic action, defense of U.S. interests is possible within these 1imits over the next six months." 103 The Sullivan memorandum warrants special attention because, al-though nominally a report on the situation, it speculated on policy and courses .of action in a way very significant to the policy formu-lation processes at this time. In discussing the role of morale as a future consideration it approached a ievel of mysticism over a pathway of dilettantism. It was stated that at Honolulu both Lodge and westmoreland had said the situation would remain in its current stale-mate unless some "victory" were introduced. Westmoreland defined 83victory as determination to take some new military commitments such as air strikes against the Viet Cong in the Laos corridor; while Lodge defined victory as willingness to make punitive air strikes against North Vietnam. "The significant fact...was that they both Westmore-land and Lodge looked toward some American decision to undertake a commitment which the Vietnamese would interpret as a willingness to raise the military ante and eschew negotiations begun from a position of weakness." Although Khanh had had some success, Vietnamese morale was still not good and needed leadership had not been displayed. If we can obtain a breakthrough in the mutual commit-ment of the U.S. in Vietnam to a confident sense of victory, we believe that we can introduce this sort of executive involvement into the Vietnamese structure No onecan define with precision just how that breakthrough can be established. It could come from the external actions of the U.S., internal leadership in Vietnam, or from an act of irreversible commitment by the United States. 104 The "logic" of this seemed to be that Khanh had not been able to provide the necessary leadership, despite all the aid and support the U.S. had given. No level of mere aid, advice, and support short of full participation could be expected to supply this deficiency, be-cause Khanh would remain discouraged and defeated until he was given full assurance of victory. He would not be able to feel that assurance of victory until the U.S. committed itself to full partici-pation in the struggle, even to the extent of co-belligerency. If the U.S. could commit itself in this way, the U.S. determination would somehow be transfused into the GVN. The problem before the assembled U.S. policy-makers, therefore, was to find some means of breakthrough into an irreversible commitment of the U.S. The actions contemplated in this memorandum were not finally decided upon at this juncture, as we know. But we were gravitating inexorably in that direction in response to forces already at work, and over which we had ceased to have much real control. The situa-tion in Vietnam had so developed, by this time, that by common consent the success of our programs in Vietnamand indeed of our whole policy there, with which we had publicly and repeatedly associated our national prestigedepended upon the stability of the GVN. Conditions being what they were, the GVN equated, for the future to which plans and actions applied, with the Khanh regime. We were therefore almost as dependent upon Khanh as he was beholden to us. Circumstances had thus forced us into a situation wherein the most immediate and press-ing goal of-our programs in Vietnam was recognized to be using our resources and prestige to perpetuate a regime that we knew was only one faction--opposed by other factionsand without any broad base of popular support. We were aware of that weakness, and fully intended, whenever it was expedient, to find ways to broaden that basis of popular support. But that was something that could beand indeed had 84to bedeferred. Meantime we had to do first things first--we had to bolster the Khanh regime, and since this could only be done by endowing it with some of our own sense of purpose and determination for the cause that was in the first instance theirs, not ours, we would prepare to do the things Khanh indicated were necessary to give him courage. 6. Increasing U.SO Involvement and Growing GVN Instability The changing of the guard in the U.S. mission in Saigon at the half year point, when Ambassador Lodge returned to the U.S. to par-ticipate in election year politics, symbolized the growing impor-tance attached by the U.S. to its Southeast Asia commitment. The combination of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs as Ambassador, backed up by a Deputy Ambassador in the person of U. Alexis Johnson, a former Under Secretary of State who had been U.S. Ambassador to Thailand and was well known in SEA, made a prestigious and impressive team. Moreover, in sending the new Ambassador, the President endowed him with unusual powers. Dear Ambassador Taylor As you take charge of the American effort in South Vietnam, I want you to have this formal expression not only of my confidence, but of my desire that you have and exercise full responsibility for the effort of the United States government in South Vietnam. In general terms this authority is parallel to that set forth in President Kennedy's letter of May 29, 1961, to all American Ambassadors; specifically, I wish it clearly understood that this overal 1 responsibility includes the whole military effort in South Vietnam and authorizes the degree of command and control that you consider appropriate. I recognize that in the conduct of the day-to-day busi-ness of the military assistance command, Vietnam, you will wish to work out arrangements which do not burden you or impede the exercise of your overall direction. At your convenience I should be glad to know of the arrangements which you propose for meeting the terms of this instruction, so that appropriate supporting action can be taken in the Defense Department and elsewhere as necessary. This letter rescinds al 1 conflicting instructions to US officers in' Vietnam. Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson 85 .By NWD Date 201 1 The new U.S. team set out immediately to systematize U.S. operations in Vietnam, including reorganization of the upper echelons of the Mission. Added to this was an effort to improve the efficiency of the GVN and USG-GVN cooperation by developing a coordinate, parallel GVN organization. On 7 July Ambassador Taylor reported that, following recommendations from Deputy Ambassador Johnson and agency heads there, he had organized U.S. mission operations under the direction of a U.S. Mission Council, over which he would preside. The Council was to consist of himself, Johnson, Westmoreland, Killen (temporarily Hurt), Zorthian, DeSilva and Sullivan. Titis group was to meet once a week as an executive organization. To support this council he also established a Coordinating Committee to be chaired by Sullivan. This would carry out Mission Council decisions and prepare the agenda for Council meetings. On the following day, 8 July, Ambassador Taylor reported that he had called upon Khanh, and that Khanh had expressed satisfaction over thenew U.S. personnel, and noted the rising morale their appointments had caused within the government. Taylor told Khanh about the formation of the Mission Council and Khanh asked for an organization chart so that he could develop a coordinate set-up within the GVN. Khanh said moreover that the U.S. should not merely advise, but should actually participate in GVN operations and decisions, "we should do this in Saigon (as well as in the provinces), between GVN ministries and offices and their American counterparts." 105 The new Ambassador did not delay in plunging into the substance of the problems that were plaguing Vietnam. In his first conversations with Khanh he asked about the status of the religious problem, and according to Taylor's report of the conversation, Khanh said the situation was still delicate, that the Catholics were better organized and were the aggressors., that Thich Tri Quang appeared reasonable when in Saigon but less so when in Hue. When the Ambassador queried Khanh about the progress of the recruiting effort, Khanh said that it was not going as well as he would like. With respect to the new pacification plan, HOP TAC, that had been agreed upon, the Ambassador expressed his approval of the general idea because paramilitary forces existed in this area to relieve ARVN. The Ambassador next took up the question of high desertion rates to which Khanh appears to have replied rather fuzzily. He said that the problem was complicated by many factors, that the Vietnamese liked to serve near home and sometimes left one service to join another. He implied that the figures might not mean exactly what they seemed to mean. The lively interest of the President at this time was indicated by his 10 July request directly to the Ambassador for a coordinated Country Team report at the end of each month to show "where we stand in the process of increasing the effectiveness of our military, economic, information, and intelligence programs, just where the Khanh government stands in the same fields, and what progress we are making in the effort to mesh our work with theirs along the lines of your talk with General Khanh. 106'86Five days later on 15 July, Ambassador Taylor transmitted estimates (not the monthly report) of VC strength which raised the previous estimate from 28,000 to 34,000. In so doing he explained thatthis was not a sudden and dramatic increase, but rather amounted to acceptance of the existence of units that had been suspected for two or three years but for which confirming evidence had only recently been received. This increased estimate of enemy strength and recent upward trend in VC activity in the North should not occasion over-concern, we have been coping with this,strength for some time without being accurately aware of its dimensions. The figures were interpretable as a reminder, however, of the growing magnitude of the problem, and of the need to raise the level of GVNUSeffort. As a result the Ambassador commented that he was expediting formulation of additional requirements to support the plans in the ensuing months. 107 For a while, there was a serious effort to coordinate USOM-GVN planning, and on 17 July 1964, USOM met with Khanh, Hoan, Oanh and others a group Khanh called the National Security Council. This cooperation was approved, as well as cooperation between USIS and the GVN information office a more sensitive problem. On 23 July 1964, Taylor and Khanh discussed this cooperation in another NSC meeting and it was agreed that, to facilitate things, mutual bureaucratic adjustments would be made. In this same meeting of 23 July, Khanh revived his pressure for offensive operations against North Vietnam and expressed again his impatience with the long pull of counterinsurgency and pacification programs. This reopening of the "march to the north" theme on 23 July was not the first revival. On 19 July, General Ky had talked to reporters about plans for operations in Laos, and on the same day Khanh himself had made indiscreet remarks about "march to the north" at a unification rally in Saigon. This led to stories and editorials in the Saigon press. The Ambassador protested the campaign as looking like an effort to force the hand of the U.S. This became a central pre-occupation of Ambassador Taylor thereafter. He firmly opposed Khanhs pressure on the one hand, and on the other had argued for patience with the GVN even though the GVN defense ministry put out an embarrassing press release immediately after the long Taylor-Khanh talk which followed on 24 July 1964.. 108 The political pressures in Saigon were at that time increasing vastly. Both Khanh and other top Vietnamese politicians and political generals were reacting in increasingly strong ways. The very evident instability of the current regime increased rapidly and at the same time there was a tendency to try to escape from the dilemmas posed 87 .,  within South Vietnam by actions against North Vietnam, actions which it had been hoped would lead to a unity within South Vietnam impos-sible under the current circumstances. There was a CAS report, for instance, of coup plotting on 24 July that said a decision had been made by the generals to remove Khanh, but that it was not clear who would replace him or whether the planned removal would be opposed. 109 This was the same day that the Ambassador, who had scarcely been in Saigon a fortnight, had first protested to Khanh concerning his in-discreet remarks about a march to the north. The Ambassador also talked to Khanh, following the Mission Council meeting, concerning the rumors of a possible coup. Khanh said that because he (Taylor i.e., the U.S) had imposed Minh on the MRC as Chief of State, and because of Minhs support of Generals Kim and Xuan and other parti-sans of French neutralist policies, Defense Minister Khiem and Chief of State Thieu were leading a group that was pressing Khanh to get rid of Minh. This Khiem block was permeated by Dai Viet political in-fluence. Khanh asked Taylor if he should resign. Taylor said the USG could not contemplate the consequences of another change of government. Because no other leader was in sight, Khanh had our support and he must continue in the face of adversity. "Could we help?" Taylor inquired. Khanh asked that we let it be known that we wanted no more changes of government and asked Taylor to talk to Khiem and his supporters about the bad effects of politics in the armed forces. 110 One means of demonstrating U.S. support of Khanh was to let Khanh make the first announcement of increased U.S. aid, followed by a back-ground statement by the Ambassador. To carry this out, the Ambassador submitted a draft statement for Khanh to use. One part of this draft-statement mentioned the increase of U.S. military advisors and their extension "to the district level." When Taylor and Johnson discussed this with Khanh at Dalat two days later, Khanh saw advantages to the proclamation in general, but preferred to change the reference "ad-visors at the district level" to read 'Advisors throughout the provinces", because the original suggested an undesirably deep penetration of the GVN by- the U.S. Ill when Ambassador Taylor on 25 July reported further on Khanh's revival of the march to the north theme, he interpreted it as re-sponse to political and morale problems within South Vietnam. The Ambassador suggested several possible motivations, and commented that if Khanh had been reasonably sincere his objective probably was to ...talk "march north" but really have in mind get- ting U.S. committed to program of reprisal bombing. Such a -limited program could be first step to further escalation against Hanoi. 112 On 10 August, when the storm clouds had already appeared but before the gale had begun to blow, Ambassador Taylor filed his first monthly U.S. mission report. The report began by expressing surprise that the first sampling of advisor-level opinion revealed more 88 .By NWD Date 201 1 optimism than among the senior U.S. officials in Saigon. Following this preliminary flourish, the report gave an introductory definition of the problem which was, in simplest terms, that the HanoiNLF strategy was not to defeat GVN military forces in battle but rather to harass and terrorize the SVN population and leadership into a state of such demoralization that a political settlement favorable to NVN would ensue. At that point they could proceed by stages to the full attainment of their goals. To oppose this strategy, the Khanh government had a complex not only of military programs, but of social, economic, psychological and above all administrative programs. This complex of programs Taylor reported on under three captions "Political," "Military" and "Overall." On the political side he reported The most important and most intractable internal problem of South Vietnam in meeting the Viet Cong threat is the political structure at the national level. The best thing that can be said about the Khanh government is that it has lasted six months and has about a 50-50 chance of lasting out the year, although probably not without some changed faces in the Cabinet. Although opposed by Minh and resisted less openly by Dai Viet sympathizers among the military, Prime Minister Khanh seems for the time being to have the necessary military support to remain in power. However, it is an ineffective government beset by inexperienced ministers who are also jealous and suspicious of each other... On the positive side, Khanh seems to have allayed the friction between Buddhists and Catholics at least for the moment, has won the cooperation of the Hoa Hao and Cao Dai, and has responded to our suggestions for improved relations between the GVN and the U.S. mission... ...Khanh has not succeeded in building any substantial body of active popular support in the countryside. In the countryside...that support for the GVN exists in direct proportion to the degree of security established by government forces... The intriguing inside his government and the absence of dramatic military or political successes react upon Khanh...moody...subjective to fits of despondency. Seeing the slow course of the counterinsurgency campaign frustrated by the weakness of his government, Khanh has turned to the "march north" theme to unify the home front and to offset the tzar weariness which he asserts is oppressing his people and his forces 113 The state of mind of Khanh and his colleagues would be an irnpor-tant factor in the future conduct of the war, Taylor judged. 89 They found slow, hard-slugging contest fatiguing to their spirits. The reprisals of 5 August (Tonkin Gulf) had given them a lift, but if indecisive bloodshed with the VC continued, they would probably exert continuing and increasing pressure for direct attack upon Hanoi. Concerning pacification, the Ambassador observed that the most difficult part of the program was the civilian follow-up after the clearing operation in the clear-and-hold program. The difficulty stemmed from the inefficiency of the ministries. To energize these civilian functions, USOM had increased its provincial representation from 45 in March to 64 in July, but this was still insufficient, despite the judgment of critical inefficiency in the ministries. Taylor next reported that "U.S. observers reported in July that in about 34 of the provinces GVN provincial and district officers were,performing effectively" It was too soon to go into details regarding Hop Tac, and the report on that program was in effect a description of its objectives and rationale rather than a progress report. The Ambassador reported that on the military side, the person-nel strength of RVNAF and of the paramilitary forces was slowly rising and by January should reach about 98 percent of the target strength of 446,000. COMUSMACV had reported at the end of July that the actual GVN strength stood at 219,954 RVNAF, 88,560 Regional Forces (formerly Civil Guard), and 127,453 Popular Forces (formerly Self Defense Corps). 114 III. FROM TONKIN TO NSAM-38 1. Tonkin Gulf and Following Political Crises As already noted, the Ambassadors first monthly report was filed just before the internal Vietnamese political storm broke in full force. Through the late spring and into July of 1964, the Buddhist-Catholic quarrel intensified. Students again began to demonstrate in Saigon and Hue. By July a coup plot was developing against Khanh led by his dis-gruntled Vice Premier, Dr. Nguyen Ton Hoan, who was backed by the Dai Viet and several top military leaders. But according to one of the best authorities, known U.S. opposition to a coun made its leaders hesitate and nothing immediately developed. 115 Then came the Tonkin Gulf affair of 2-4 August, and the U.S. retaliatory strikes of 4-5 August. An immediate effect of the raids was to shore up Khanh's weaken-ing position. But contrary to prevailing theories and hopes, stability was very short-lived. Khanh sought to exploit the affair by a radio appeal for unity and national discipline. He did not arrest the coup 90 ,Section 3,3   plotters however, which many Vietnamese but not the U.S. Embassy --advised. Instead, on 7 August, he announced a state of emergency re-imposed censorship and other prescriptions and restrictions on liber-ties and movements of the Vietnamese people. 116 Apparently hoping to further exploit the opportunity, Khanh hurriedly sought to draw up a new charter to centralize and increase his powers. On 12 August he discussed this for the first time with Ambassador Taylor, The Ambassador made two comments, one suggesting caution lest "renewed instability...result from these sweeping changes," the other urging a public explanation of the need for the changes be-cause of a state of emergency. 11-7 Two days later at a joint NSC planning session, Khanh showed Ambassador Taylor a rough translation of the proposed draft of a new charter. It was hastily drawn and included both dubious provisions and gruff language. The Ambassador was immediately afraid this would lead to criticism in the U.S. and the world press; he assigned Sullivan and Manfull to work on a revision. But they had little time and were unable to exert much influence. A day later, August 15, the Ambassador reported the document still did not satisfy him but that the MRC fully intended to impose it and he saw no alternative to trying to make the best of it. Certain passages evidently had been toned down and some-thing resembling a bill of rights inserted. Nevertheless the charter gave virtually complete power to Khanh. A special session of the MRC approved Khanhs new charter and elected him President. Minh was expediently removed the charter abolished his job as Chief of State. Since his overthrow at the end of January Minh had been inactive and sulky; but whatever his faults he had a considerable following within South Vietnam. It had been American policy to convince Khanh to bring Minh into his government thereby endowing the Khanh regime with some of Minhs popularity. Khanh had acceded to U.S. wishes. But Minhs presence had not yielded the hoped for unity. Ambassador Taylor, Minhs friend for several years, had attempted to patch up the deteriorating relations between the two generals but these efforts only incurred Khanhs suspicion of Taylor. 118 In the period immediately following the Tonkin Gulf affair, Wash-ington officials sought agreement on Southeast Asian policies. We were entering a new era. On 14 August, State cabled a summary of a tentative policy paper to Saigon, Vientiane and CINCPAC for comment. The paper began Ly stating that during the next fortnight no pre-cipit ate actions that might relieve the Communists of the onus of further escalation should be taken. DESOTO patrols should be held up; there should be no extra 34A operations. But low morale and lost momentum in SVN had to be treated. The best means to improve morale in South Vietnam and at the same time pressure North Vietnam at the lowest level of risk had to be found. This was the guiding philosophy. Basically required were military pressures plus other actions to convince Hanoi and Peking to cease aggression. Negotia-tion trithout continued military pressure would not achieve these oi' . objectives. The paper listed seven courses of limited pressure similar to those already exerted, then discussed more serious actions. Lesser pressures, it was stated, were to relay the threat of systematic, mili-tary action against the DRw Hanoi was to be informed that incidents arising from the lesser actions or deterioration in South Vietnam particularly clear evidence of increased infiltration from the North could trigger that sustained action. In any case, for planning purposes the paper looked to 1 January 1965 as the starting point for the more serious systematic pressures. 119 The Mission comment took the form of an alternative draft. It began by agreeing with the assumption of the proposed Department paper, that the present pacification plan, by itself, was insufficient to maintain national morale or to offer reasonable hope of eventaul success. Some-thing more was clearly needed. The main problem in the immediate future was to gain time for the Khanh regime to achieve a modicum of stability and thereby provide a viable base for operations. In particular, if we can avoid it, we should not get involved militarily with North Vietnam or possibly with Red China if our base in South Vietnam is insecure and Khanhs Army is tied down by the VC insurgency. A second objective was to maintain the morale of the GVN. The mission judged that this would not be difficult if we could assure Khanh of our readiness to bring added pressure on Hanoi in return for evidence of his ability and willingness to do his part. A third objective would be to hold the DRV in check and restrain further infiltration to aid the VC buildup. 1 January 65 was agreed upon, for planning purposes, as the date to begin the escalating pressure on the DRw Three aspects of these pressures were considered by the Mission first, actions to be taken with the Khanh government; second, actions a,gainst Hanoi; and third, after a pause, "initiation of an orchestrated air attack against North Vietnam." The first of these involved a commitment, "we should express our willingness to Khanh to engage in planning and eventually to exert intense pressure on North Vietnam providing certain conditions are met in advance." Thus, before we would agree to go all out against the North, Khanh must stabilize his government and make progress in. cleaning out his ovm backyard. Specifically, he would be required to execute the initial phases of the HOP TAC plan successfully. This would have to succeed to the extent of pushing the VC away from the doors of Saigon. Moreover, the overa.11 pacification program, including HOP TAC, should progress sufficiently to allow earmarking at least three division equivalents for the defense of the I Corps area should the DRV step up military operations in that area. In making these commitments to Khanh, the Mission would make clear to Khanh the limited nature of our objectives--that we were not readyto join in a crusade to unify the North and the South, nor to overthrow Ho Chi Minh. Our objective was to be limited to inducing Hanoi to cease its subversive efforts in the South. Pursuant of this philosophy, the Mission draft proposed a program roughly comparable to that suggested by washington. The specific difference was the emphasis in the Mission draft on the need for a stable base in South Vietnam before beginning overt pressures on the North; and, to effect this, the policy of a quid pro quo getting Khanh to clean up his house and make some progress in pacification as the price of our commitment to pressures against the North. 120 During the fast moving events of the third week of August, the President decided to bring Ambassador Taylor back to Washington for consultation early in September. In a joint State-Defense message on 20 August, Taylor was advised of questions that officials in various departments would want to ask during his forthcoming visit. The visit was first scheduled for the end of the month, but along with the draft policy paper of mid-month, the original plans were overtaken by political events (turmoil) in Vietnam, and the meeting was postponed about two weeks, from late August to mid-September. It is worth noting, nevertheless, that among the items still prominent in the intended discussions with Taylor, at the time of the first notice of the meeting, were the status of pacification programsHOP TAC especiallyCorps, division and provincial plans; the joint USGVN committees; the newly-established operations center; the role of Popular Forces and of Regional Forces; and the RVNAF police and local security plans. Pacification was the first item, and detailed interest was indicated. 121 Shaplen calls the week from 16 Augustwhen Khanh publicly announced the new charterto 23 August critical, because of Khanhs failure to establish a broadly based civilian government under the author-ity of the new charter. He had been warned by many Vietnamese that the pressures of civilian and religious demands for a voice in the government were building up, but nothing was done and major demonstrations began again on 21 August. 122 This account will not detail the political events that occurred from 21 August on. However, to keep our American concern with programs in Vietnam in context it is necessary to keep in mind the general sequence of political events during the turmoil of the next several weeks. On 21 August the first serious student demonstration following the proclamation of the 16 August charter occurred. Khanh met with the students, but did not satisfy their demands. The same day Thich Tam Chau, President of the Buddhist Institute for Secular Affairs, demanded that Khanh take action against the-Diemist Can Lao Party, whom the Buddhists alleged to be their oppressors. Both Buddhists and Viet Cong began to infiltrate the fringes of the student demonstrations about this time. A confused, many- sided contest developed with Catholics, Viet Cong and Buddhists seeking to manipulate or exploit the student demonstrations. On 23 August the Buddhists in Hue formed a new Movement for the Salvation of Buddhism in Danger (similar to the organization against Diem). Bombs were set off 93around town (very possibly by the Viet Cong), and demonstrations spread to other cities. On the night of 24 August another coup rumor spread. It was later suspected that Dai Viet generals had indeed been ready to move that night, but that Khiem, who had been wavering between Khanh and the Dai Viet, told them to wait. That same night Khanh asked three top bonzes to come to Cap St. Jacques for consultation. They refused, and Khanh for his part rushed back to Saigon. He met with them and they demanded, first, abolition of the 15 August charter, second establishment of government councils to assure full freedom of religion and expression, and third, free elections by 1 November 1965. Khanh made the mistake of telling them he wanted to consult with the Americans. At 100 a.m. on 25 August, Ambassador Taylor and Deputy Ambassador Johnson met with Khanh and they "unofficially" advised him to accept the Buddhist demands in principle, but otherwise to be tough and not to knuckle under to any minority. The conference lasted until about 300 a.m. At 500 a.m. of 25 August, Khanh issued a communique promising to revise the new constitution, reduce press censorship, rectify local abuses by arranging special courts, and permit continued demonstrations, with the proviso that those responsible for actions of disorder be punished. But these concessions again were not enough to satisfy the students. Later that morning a crowd of 25,000 gathered in front of Khanh's office. Khanh appeared before them and denied that he wanted to be a dictator, but refused to make further concessions. He did not, however, have the corwd dispersed. Instead, he withdrew and then, without warning, issued an announcement from his military headquarters that the 16 August charter would be withdrawn and the he, Khanh, was quitting. Further, he announced that the MRC would meet the next day, 26 August, to choose a new Chief of State. 123 The MRC met on 26 and 27 August. Khanh brought in the three generals he had accused of participating in the pro-French neutralist plot, as a ploy to forestall a power bid oy Minh. But the Council refused to seat them and they were returned to their protective custody at Dalat. While these maneuvers were going on street demonstrations continued. Within the MRC Khiem failed in an attempt to name himself Chief of State and Minh Prime Minister. Next Khanh was named Prime Minister, but refused to accept either Khiem or Minh as President. Finally, when he refused to be installed alone, the triumvirate of Khanh, Minh and Kiem was chosen. Anarchy in the streets of Saigon intensified. Khanh again nominally Prime Minister, was by this time back in Dalat in a state of exhaustion. The troika of Khanh, Minh and Khiem never met, and Nguyen Xuan Oanh was made acting Prime Minister. Rumors of coups continued--one supposedly by the Dai Viet, another by the so-called "colonels' Group." 124 On 29 August 1964 Vietnamese paratroopers with bayonets were used 94 I', f to restore order in Saigon. At this time Khanh was in Dalat. On 1 September General Westmoreland went to see Khanh in Dalat to urge him to keep ARVN on the offensive against the Viet Cong and to press on with HOP TAC and the other pacification programs. As a quid pro quo for tills, westmoreland revised his previous position, and promised that U.S. advisors throughout MACV would alert Khanh to unusual troop movements (movements which might be an indication of a coup). 125 Meanwhile, because of this turnoil, Ambassador Taylor's trip to washington had been postponed until the end of the first week of September. There was further excitement on the night of 2 September, when dissident troops, mostly aligned with Dai Viet leaders, began to converge on the city. But some of the Colonels' Group got wind of the movement and stopped the advance before midnight, stringing along with Khanh for the time being. Meanwhile, a new group had been formed in Hue called the Peoples Revolutionary Committee, which, accordingto Shaplen, had "distinct tones of separatism," and was verbally'attacking the temporary government. On 4 September Khanh returned to Saigon from his Dalat retreat, and announced a tentative formula for new administrative machinery to take over for the next two months, after which a new government of civilians would replace the government of the military. Khanh was welcomed, and produced a letter, signed by both Thich Tri Quang and Thich Tam Chau, pledging support and unity. Reportedly this had been paid for by a sum equalling $230,000. Deals of this kind were by no means unknown in Vietnam. Khanh at this time finally got rid of Dr. Hoan, who had been plotting against him for a long time, by forcing his resignation and exile to Japan. 126 Follow-ing this there was enough of a lull to permit the Ambassador to return to Washington. He would not complete the round trip, however, before turmoil erupted again in Saigon. 2. Policies in the Period of Turmoil On the eve of his 6 September departure for washington, Ambassdaor Taylor cabled a review of the Vietnamese situation ...At best the emerging governmental structure might be capable of maintaining a holding operation against the Viet Cong. This level of effort could, with luck and strenuous efforts, be expanded to produce certain limited pacification successes, for example, in the territory covered by the HOP TAC Plan. But the willingness and ability of such a government to exert itself or to attempt to execute an allout pacification plan would be marginal. It would probably he incapable of galvanizing the people to the heightened levels of unity and sacrifice necessary to carry forward the counterinsurgency program to final success. Instead, it would look increasingly to the United States to take the major responsibility for prying the VC and the North Vietnamese off the backs of the South Vietnamese population...In the cold light of recently acquired 95facts, we need 2 to 3 months to get any sort of government going which has any chance of being able to maintain order in the cities and to con-tinue the pacification efforts of past levels. There is no present urge to march north...the leadership is exhausted and frustrated...and not anxious to take on any new problems or obligations. Hence, there is no need to hasten our plans to satisfy an impatience to close with the enemy... 127 n -..On 4 September the Acting Assistant-Secretar y of Defense for International Security Affairs, Peter Solbert, forwarded to the Secretary of Defense a memorandum including a set of summary recommendations for a program of overall social development called "stability for the GVN." Copies of this memorandum were seen by both Vance and McNamara, but there is no documentary evidence that it was given serious consideration. The program was based on a longer RAND study by C. J. Zwick, and it proposed a series of measures to broaden popular support of the Govern-ment of Vietnam. The measures were divided into an Urban Program and a Rural Program. Summarily, under the Urban Program, there were six major areas of development 1. a reduction of consumer prices for selected commodities; 2. an increase in government salaries; 3- mass low cost public housing; 4. urban public works; 5- expanded educational programs; and 6. an improved business climate to foster private business. Under the proposed Rural Program there were four items 1. an elimination of corvee labor and provision for paid public works; 2. subsidized credit to peasants under GVN control; 3. an increase in military pay and benefits; and 4. educational assistance to rural youths. This memorandum further suggested that involving in the program the leaders of the various political factions in Vietnam who were currently causing trouble would indirectly enlist them in what amounted to stabilising efforts, and the current plague of factionalism might be reduced. 128 96I.11',The policy consensus reached in the high level discussions of 7 September was formalized in NSAM-314. These decisions were approved 1. Resumption of U.S. Naval patrols (DESOTO) in the Gulf of Tonkin, following the return to Saigon of the Ambassador2. 34A operations by the GVN to be resumed after completion of the first DESOTO patrol.3. Discussions with the government of Laos of plans for a limited GVN air-ground operation in the Laos corridor areas4. Preparation to respond against the DRV to any attack on U.S. units or any spectacular DRVVC acts against South Vietnam. Following the statement of these specific action decisions, NSAM-314 reemphasized the importance of economic and political actions having irnmedi-ate impact on South Vietnam such as pay raises to civilian personnel and spot projects in cities and selected rural areas. The emphasis on immediate impact should be noted. Finally, it was emphasized that all decisions were "governed by a prevailing judgment that the first order of business at present is to strengthen the fabric of the Government of South Vietnam..." 129 In the period immediately after the August crisis, Minh, acting, in effect, as Chief of State, although he did not actually hold the title, appointed a new High National Council to represent all elements of the population and prepare a new constitution for the return of civilian government. But there was no real stability. On 13 September, while Ambassador Taylor was on his way back to Saigon from his visit to Washington, a bloodless coup was staged in Saigon by General Lam Van Phat (who had been scheduled to be removed as Commander of IV Corps). Soon after the coup began the U.S. announced its support for the "dulv constituted" troika regime of Khanh, Minh and Khiem. This plus a counter-coup by a group of younger officers including Nguyen Cao Ky and Nguyen Chanh Thi, put Khanh back in power.One result of the Phat coup attempt, however, was that it established the power of the younger general officers headed by Ky and Thi. Nguyen Van Thieu, who was close to the Dai Viet party, was reported to be a major behind-the-scenes manipulator of the coup, mainly by neutralizing his immediate boss, General Khiem. 130 The next several weeks amounted to a period of suspended animation for the GVN (but not for the VC) while the new constitution was being prepared. Except for some debatable progress in HOP TAC, little was accomplished in pacification. Moreover, infusing an interim government with an efficiency that neither it nor any predecessor had had was too much to expect. In Saigon, much attention was given to establishing a policy coordination centerfor covert military operations -- i.e., 34A, Cross-Border, Yankee Team, Lucky Dragon, etc. These operations, and the political problems of the central government, appear to have been the principal immediate concerns of the Em-bassy during this period. In October, Washington queried the Embassy as to whether greater progress in pacification might result from further decentralization of the program, even raising the question of whether aid might not bypass the GVN in Saigon and go directly to the provinces. In reply, the Mission conceded that a good deal of decentralization was already in effect and that in some provinces local initiative was paying off. Progress was continuing despite the turmoil in Saigon. Nevertheless, recent U.S. advisor reports showed that the number of provinces where pacification was not going satisfactorily had doubled since July from 7 to 14. This in part was due to concentration of most of the pacification efforts on HOP TAC, and in part to the political turmoil in Saigon. However, the Mission did not believe that further decentralization was either feasible or advisable. The central problem in administering pacification, in the considered view of the Mission, was to establish justified requirements at the provincial level and then fill pipelines to meet these provincial needs. This required overall coordination. 131 Two weeks after the 13 September coup, the High National Council, composed of 17 elderly professional men, was inaugurated. Despite the continuing air of crisis, the Council fulfilled its promise to deliver a new constitution by the end of October and selected Phan Khac Suu (an older, non-aligned politi-cian) as the new Chief of Staff. Suu immediately chose a civilian, Tran Van Huong, as new Premier. Euong almost immediately came under fire from several factions and it soon became apparent that Khanh was still the real power be-hind the throne. Khanh got rid of Khiem, sending him to washington, and Minh went abroad on a "goodwill tour." 132 As the year moved toward a close it came time again for the Ambassador to return to washington for policy consultations. Progress in the program within South Vietnam had been spotty at best, and in many areas retrogression could not be denied. The efforts to develop efficient administration within the GVN had made no progress at all the game of musical chairs at the top made this impossible. It was generally conceded that pacification had fallen back, at best marking time in some areas. As for the HOP TAC area immediately surrounding Saigon, opinions were divided. The official view reflected in the statis-tical analysis was that slow but steady progress was being made. Most of the informal and local judgments, however, were less sanquine. Some increases in RVNAF recruitment had been registered, but this did not mean that action against the VC had improved, that capabilities had increased, that lost ground was being-retaken, or that., control of the rural population was being wrested from the Viet Cong. 3. The Period of Increasing Pressures on NVN In anticipation of the Ambassadors forthcoming visit to Washington, General Westmoreland provided an assessment of the military situation. 98On 24 November General westmoreland observed that in September the Mission had been preoccupied with the problem of keeping RVNAF intact in the face of internal dissention and political and religious purges but by late November he was pleased at the way the RVNAF had weathered the political storm and encouraged by increased RVNAF strength because of volunteers and enlistments. RVNAF strength of 31 October was compared to figures for 30 April 230,474 RVNAF, up from 207,41; 92,265 Regional Force$ up from 85,660; 159,392 Popular Forces, up from 96,263. During September and October, RVNAF and Regional Forces officers and NCOs to the rank of first corporal had received a 10 increase in basic pay; the lowest three enlisted grades in these forces -- plus all Popular Force personnel -- had received 300 more piastres per month. Cost of living increases to NCOs matched those given to officers. Subsector U.S. advisory teams (two officers, three enlisted men) were operating in some 75 districts. General Westmoreland reported HOP TAC was progressing slowly. Civil-military-political planners were working together; the Saigon-level coordinating group, the HOP TAC Council, was operating. General Westmoreland summarized the key issues as he viewed them at the time. First, there was a need to establish concrete but attainable shortrange goals to give momentum; second, more effective means of asserting U.S. policy and plans for the pacification program at the Saigon level was needed; third, the U.S. should take a positive position against external support of the insurgency. 133 Also on 24 November, westmoreland recommended an increase in RVNAF force structure and requested its early approval to permit official negotiations with the GVN, to facilitate MAP planning. This recommendation followed a joint U.S.GVN survey and a COMUSMACV staff study. Two alternative levels of increase were proposed Already Increase New Total Authorized Alt 1 Alt 2 Alt 1 Alt 2 RVNAF Para Mil 243,599 30,309 47,556 No alt. for Para. Mil. 212,246 273,908 291,155 322,187 109,941 The increase in U.S. advisors for the two alternative programs would be 446 and 606, respectively. The first (the lower) alternative was supported by the"JCS on 17 December 1964 and approved by Secretary McNamara on 13 January 1965. This January decision raised the total U.S. military personnel in Vietnam from 22,309 to 22,755. 134 99Both the tenor of the thinking and the policies that emerged from the meetings of early December are reflected in the draft instructions from the President to Ambassador Taylor possibly written by Taylor himself. These were first drawn up on 30 November 1964, revised on 2 December and used at the meeting of the principals on 3 December. During the recent review in Washington of the situation in South Vietnam, it was clearly established that the unsatisfactory progress being made in the pacification of the VC was the result of two primary causes from which many secondary causes stemmed; first, the governmental instability in Saigon and the second, the continued reinforcement and direction of the VC by the North Vietnamese government. To change the downward trend of events, it will be necessary to deal adequately with both of these factors. It is clear however that these factors are not of equal importance. There must be a stable, effective government to conduct a campaign against the VC even if the aid of North Vietnam for the VC should end. While the elimination of North Vietnamese intervention will raise morale on our side and make it easier for the government to function, it trill not in itself end the war against the VC. It is rather an important contributory factor to the creation of conditions favoring a successful campaign against the VC within South Vietnam. Since action against North Vietnam is contributory, not central, we should not incur the risks which are inherent in expansion of hostilities until there is a government in Saigon capable of handling the serious problems involved in such an expansion and of exploiting the favorable effects which may be anticipated from an end of support and direction by North Vietnam. It is this consideration which has borne heavily on the recent deliberations in washington and has conditioned the conclusions reached. There have been many expressions of admiration for the courage being shown by the Huong government which has the complete support of the U.S. government in its resistance to the minority pressures which are attempting to drag it down. However, the difficulties which it is facing raise inevitable questions as to its capacity and readiness to discharge the responsibilities which it would incur if some of the new measures under consideration were taken. There are certain minimum criteria of performance in South Vietnam which must be met before any new measures against North Vietnam would be either justified or practicable. At a minimum the government should be able to speak for and to its people who will need guidance and leadership throughout, the coming critical period. It should be capable of maintaining law and order in its principal 100centers of population, make plans for the conduct of operations and assure their efficient execution by military and police forces completely responsive to its authority. It must have the means to cope with the enemy reactions which must be expected to result from any change in the pattern of our operations. I (the President) particularly request that you and your colleagues in the American Country Team develop and execute a concerted effort to bring home to all groups in South Vietnam the paramount impor-tance of national unity against the Communist enemy at this critical time. It is a matter of the greatest difficulty for the U.S. govern-ment to require great sacrifice of American citizens when reports from Saigon reportedly give evidence of heedless self-interest and shortsightedness among nearly all major groups in South Vietnam... While effectiveness is largely a subjective judgement, progress in certain specific areas such as those listed below provide some tangible measure. The U.S. mission should urge upon the GVN parti-cular efforts in these fields (1) Improve the use of manpower for military and pacification purposes. (2) Bring the armed forces and police to authorized strength and maximize their effectiveness. (3) Replace incompetent officials and commanders; freeze the competent in place for extended periods of service. (4) Clarify and strengthen police powers of arrest, detention, and interrogation of VC suspects. (5) Clarify and strengthen the authority of provincial chiefs. (6) Make demonstrable progress in the HOP TAC operation around Saigon. (7) Broaden and intensify the civic action program using both military and civilian resources to produce tangible evidence of the desire of the government to help the hamlets and villages. (8) Carry out a sanitary clean up of Saigon. while progress was being made toward these goals, the U.S. would be willing to strike harder at infiltration routes in Laos and at sea and, in conjunction with the Lao Government, add U.S. air power to operations to 101 . restrict the use of Laotian territory for infiltration into South Vietnam. The U.S. would also favor intensification of MAROPS (covert activities against the DRV). In the meantime, GVN and U.S. armed forces should be ready to execute prompt reprisals for any unusual hostile action. When these conditions were met (and after the GVN had demonstrated its firm control) the U.S. would be prepared to consider a program of direct mi.li-tary pressure on the DRw These second phase operations would consist of a series of air attacks on the DRV progressively mounting in scope and intensity for the purpose of convincing DRV leaders that it was in their interest to cease aid to the VC to respect the independence and security of the South. The prospective participants in such attacks were the Air Forces of the U.S., South Vietnam and Laos. The U.S. Mission was to be authorized to initiate planning with the GVN for such operations immediately, with the understanding that the U.S. had not committed itself to them. 135 Immediately after the Ambassadors return to Saigon the U.S. began to increase its covert operations against infiltration from the North. On 14 December U.S. aircraft began Operation BARREL ROLL (armed reconnaissance against infiltration routes in Laos). This and other signs of increased American commitment against North Vietnams involvement in the South showed no results in terms of increasing GVN stability. Jockeying among generals behind the scenes continued. The younger generals who had saved Khanh in the 13 September coup demanded the High National Council fire nine generals and 30 other officers, notably Generals Minh, Don, Xuan and Kim, who had been in the original post-Diem junta. The Council refused and the young generals began a life and death struggle against the Huong regime. On 20 December Generals Thi and Ky led their group in a purge or virtual coup of the Council. This was followed immediately by formation of an Armed Forces Council (AFC). Nominally headed by Khanh, the young generals aimed to curb his powers through the new council. AFC offered to mediate conflicts between Buddhist dissidents and the Huong government. These actions exacerbated already unhappy relations between Khanh and politically-motivated young generals and the American Ambassador who was striving to foster a representative civilian government and discourage coups by smalltime military dictators. The struggle (described in detail in other papers) was intensified at this time and continued for several weeks. 136 Throughout January and February 1965 the weekly Vietnam Sitreps published by the Intelligence and Reporting Subcommittee of the Interagency Vietnam Coordinating Committee warned generally and repeatedly that progress concerning pacification was "slow" or that there was a "slow down" or said there was "little progress to report." The Vietnanse'commander of the HOP TAC area generally continued to report "a favorable situation" but this was accompanied frequently by a statement of increased Viet Cong activity in these favorable areas. 102After BARREL ROLL, U.S. pressure upon North Vietnam was notably increased by the FLAMING DART attacks of 7-12 February following the Pleiku incident. The McGeorge Bundy group (MacNaughton, Cooper, Unger and Bundy) were in Saigon at the time. On the return trip to Washington shortly after Pleiku, the group drafted a memorandum for the President. Intended to reflect the consensus of policy discussions with the Mission, the memorandum really reflects Bundys point of view, particularly in presentation of a rationale for ROLLING THUNDER operationssoon to begin. Analysis of this memo and the ROLLING THUNDER annex is part of another report in this series. For present purposes it is sufficient to note that the memo reported the situa-tion in Vietnam was deteriorating and said defeat was inevitable unless the United States intervened military by bombing the North to persuade Hanoi to cease and desist. South Vietnam was to be rescued not by measures in South Vietnam but by pressures against the North. The idea that victory could be achieved quickly was explicitly dis-missed perhaps "the next year or so" would be enough to turn the tide. And this, hopefully, could be accomplished by the persuasive power of aerial bombardment. ROLLING THUNDER was to be a program of sustained, continuous, increas-ing reprisal beginning at a low level and becoming increasingly violent. The level of violence would vary according to the North Vietnamese response if they persisted in infiltration, violence would continuously increase; if they reduced their meddling, we would respond in kind and degree. This subject had been discussed at considerable length in Saigon. The Bundy memorandum was followed by a cable from Taylor which presented generally similar recommendations under the heading of "graduated reprisals." CINCPAC commented on the Taylor proposals, urging that the levels of attack should be forceful enough to be militarily effective, not merely politically persuasive. On 8 February, McNamara requested the JCS to develop a program; shortly thereafter they produced their "Eight-week-Program" of bombing. In Saigon, the FLAMING DART bombings of 7-12 February the first reprisal bombings since August 1964 were promptly followed by the Armed Forces Council selection on 16 February of a new cabinet; headed by Dr. Pham Huy Quat, the cabinet was installed on 18 February. Another coup was attempted on 19 February but thwarted by the AFC. And General Khanh (whose actions against Huong in January had lost him Taylor's con-fidence) was removed on the 20th. Four days later, 24 February, Khanh left for foreign parts and ROLLING THUNDER began. Any positive correla-tion between-U.S', pressure on North Vietnam and the stability of the GVN remained to be established. During these first two months of 1965 almost no progress was made toward increasing RVNAF strength. Goals were raised but actual force103levels were not. MACV data on RVNAF strength were later provided the Secretary 137 RVNAF IN THOUSANDS Jan 65 Feb 65 Mar 65 Apr 65 May 65 Objective 252.1 259.5 266.9 274.3 Actual 244.7 245.5 248.5 252.3 256.9 Shortfall (6.6) (11.0) (14.6) (17.4) KIA 35 .32 .27 .27 .42 Desertions 2.4 2.5 5.0 3.6 3.1 Although the conditions stipulated in December had not been met, although the program continued to fall further behind, we were fully committed to pressure on the North by this time. On 1 March 1965, in a memorandum to all Service Secretaries Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Chief of Naval Operations, Army and Air Force Chiefs of Staff and Commandant of the Marine Corps, the Secretary of Defense pledged unlimited funds to the support of the Vietnam effort. Over the past two or three years I have emphasized the importance of providing all necessary military assistance to South Vietnam, whether it be through MAP or through application of U.S. forces and their associated equipment. Occasionally instances come to my attention indicating that some in the Department feel restraints are imposed by limitations of funds. I want it clearly understood that there is an unlimited appropriation available for the financing of aid to Vietnam. Under no circumstances is a lack of money to stand in the way of aid to that nation. signedRobert S. McNamara Early in March the Chief of Staff of the Anny, General Harold K. Johnson, evaluated the need for added supporting actions in Vietnam.'104On 5 March his party was briefed by the Ambassador. Taylor saw the basic unresolved problem as the provision of adequate security for the population, without it, other programs were either impossible or of marginal, effec-tiveness at best. Given security and reasonable time, however, these other programs would fall into place. The three primary causes of insecurity were (1) lack of satisfactory progress in destroying the VC, (2) the continuing capability of the VC to replace losses and increase their strength, and (3) our inability to establish and maintain an effective government. Inability to suppress the insurgency was considered largely the conse-quence of insufficient trained paramilitary and police manpower. A numer-ical superiority in excess of five to one over the VC had never been obtained; historical example suggested a lO-to-l or 2O-to-1 ratio was pre-requisite to effective operations against guerrilla forces. It was there-fore essential to raise new forces and improve those already in being. Why was the pacification program of such limited effectiveness? In many provinces the reason was poor --or non-existent civil action after military clearing operations. The Ministries of Interior, Health, Agri-culture, Public Works and Rural Affairs were responsible for civilian "follow-up" but these departments had been impotent throughout 1964, largely because of general government instability. Programs lacked continuity; personnel were constantly rotating. Occasional military successes achieved in clearing operations too frequently went unexploited. Areas were cleared but not held. Other areas were cleared and held but were not developed; the VC infra-structure remained in place, ready to emerge when the troops moved on. Counterinsurgency was plagued by popular apathy and dwindling morale, some the consequences of a long and seemingly endless war. There was no sense of dedication to the GVN comparable to that instilled in the VC. Secondly, South Vietnam's open frontiers could not be sealed against infiltration. Continued DRV support to the VC, the heart of the infil-tration problem, could not be eliminated by closing the frontiers from inside South Vietnam so the only way to stop infiltration was to make Hanoi order it stopped. Such was the fundamental justification for BARREL ROLL and ROLLING THUNDER operations. These, plus 34A, constituted the principal hope for ending infiltration. It was conceded that even without its support from the North the VC could continue to recruit in the South, especially in areas lacking security and commitment to Saigon. However, it was hoped that pressure on Hanoi would help to change many conditions unfavorable to the GVN. For example, offensive action against NVN would raise national morale in South Vietnam and might provide at least a partial antidote against the willingness of country boys to join the VC.105There were many causes of the failure to establish and maintain an effective government. South Vietnam had never been a nation in spirit; a government which the people could call their own was new to them. Even now their instinct said any government was intrinsically their enemy. The people had long been divided by racial and religious differences which over the centuries their alien rulers had sought to perpetuate. No cement was present to bind together the heterogeneous elements of this society. Since the fall of Diem and the sudden removal of the restraints imposed by his dictatorial regime, the natural tendency to disunity and factional-ism had been given free play; demonstrations, bonze immolations and mili-tary coups had been rife. These had produced the political turbulence of the last fifteen months. The Ambassador closed his briefing by suggesting the possibility of increased activities in several areas a. improvement in training and mobility of existing forces; b. establishment of priorities in the use of existing forces; c. expansion of the capacity of the training establishment; d. means to give greater attractiveness to military service; e. use of U.S. manpower to offset the present shortage in the Vietnamese armed forces; f. use of U.S. Navy resources to strengthen surveillance of coastal and inland waterways; g. increased tempo for BARRET. ROLL and ROLLING THUNDER; h. expanded use of peoples action teams; i. increased U.S. aid in combatting economic ills; j. preparations to cope with the mounting refugee problem in central Vietnam; k. improved procedures and equipment for resource control; 1. vitalization of public information programs, provision of a 250-kilowatt transmitter for Saigon; and m. prompt response to all personnel requests supporting the U.S. mission. 138 106.General Johnson returned on 12 March, submitted his report on the 14th. The guts of the report, a series of 21 recommendations plus an indication of marginal comments Secretary McNamara scribbled on his copy follow (the Secretarys comments are in parentheses) 1. Provide increased mobility for existing forces by intro-ducing more Army helicopter companies. (OK) 2. Deploy more 0-1 type aircraft to give saturation surveil-lance capability to improve intelligence. (OK) 3. Establish Joint U.S.-RVNAF Target Research and Analysis Center to utilize increased info effectively. (OK) 4. Evaluate effects of COMUSMACVs unrestricted employment of U.S. fighter-bombers within SVN. (?) 5. Increase scope and tempo of U.S. air strikes against NVN. (Discuss with Chiefs.) 6. Remove self imposed restrictions on conduct of U.S. air strikes against North Vietnam. (Some already removed. Views of Chiefs.) 7. Increase tempo and scope of special operations activities against North Vietnam. (Ask Max for plan.) 8. Increase Naval and air RECCE and harassing operations against North Vietnam. (Ask Max for plan.) 9. Re-orient BARREL ROLL to increase effectiveness. (OK) 10. Commit elements of 7th Fleet to airsurface patrol of coastal areas. (OK, ask Max for plan.) 11. Program of cash awards for capture of DRV junks. (OK, ask Max for plan.) 12. Streamline procedure to give MACV quick authority and funds for construction projects in VN. (See 13) 13. Establish stockpile of construction materials and equipment within 3 to 4 sailing days of VN controlled by MACw (Applicable to both 12 and 13John to work with Paul and Charlie.) ASDISA, SecNav and SecArmy respectively 10714. Get AustralianNew Zealand agreement to take responsibility for establishing regional forces training center. (Ask State to try.) 15.Integrated U.SGVN psychological warfare operations organization. (USIA job,DOD will help.) 16. Accelerate positioning of remaining sub-sector advisory teams. (OKask Max his requirements.) 17. Provide cash contingency fund to each sub-sector advisory group. (OKask Max for his plan.) 18. Establish procedure for sub-sector advisory groups to draw on USOM food stuffs and building materiala (OKask Max for his plan.) 19. Initiate dredging projects at Danang, Qui Nhon and Nha Trang. (OKask Max for his requirements.) 20. Provide 4 LSTs and 6 LSVs for logistic support along eastwest supply axis. (OKask Max for his requirements.) 21. Accelerate program for jet applicable airfield. (What is the program?John will follow.) To the measures the Secretary added one of his own "extend tours." It was incorporated into later versions of the list. In addition to the above the Johnson report suggested two alternative deployments of a tailored division force to assist Vietnamese units in offensive action in II Corps. One was to deploy U.S. combat units to assume responsibility for security of the Bien Hoa-Tan Son Nhut air base complex, Nha Trang, Qui Nhon and Pleiku. The second was to deploy U.S. combat units to assume responsibility for defense of Kontum, Pleiku and Darlac provinces in II Corps. On the first alternative the Secretary noted "Johnson does not recommend this;" he suggested that JCS should study, and "Maxs and Nestys views" toward the second alternative should be sought. 139 On 8 March, when Johnson was in Vietnam, the first two Marine battalions landed at Danang. Almost all of the intelligence reports during that month indicated our programs in Vietnam were either stalemated or failing. Not only was RVNAF strength considerably below the goals set and agreed upon, it was in considerable danger of actually decreasing. The situation on this score was indicated by the following table included in the March MACV report. 140 108Authorized Strength 28 Feb 65 Audited Strength 31 Mar 65 Estimates Regular Force 274,163 245.453 246,500 Regional Force 137,187 99,143 100,000 Popular Force 185,000 162,642 160,000 Coastal Force 4,640 4,137 4,150 CIDG 20,100 19,152 19,500 National Police 51,500 33,599 34,500 Armed Combat Youth 44,244 44,500 140 Although some HOP TAC progress was occasionally reported the pacification situation otherwise was quite gloomy. The Vietnam Sitreps of 3 March 1965 reported the nationwide pacification effort remained stalled. The HOP TAC program "continues but personnel changes, past and future, may retard the future success of this effort." The 10 March Sitrep called the national paci-fication effort "stagnated" and objectives in some areas "regressing." In the I and II Corps pacification has "all but ceased." Only a few widely scattered places in the rest of the country could report any achievement. In the HOP TAC area the anticipated slow-down in pacification had arrived the result of shifting mi 3 itary commanders and province and district chiefs. On 17 March, pacification was virtually stalled, refugee problems were mount-ing in I and II Corps. Only in the HOP TAC area were there "modest gains... in spite of increased VC area activity." By 24 March the word used for pacification efforts generally was "stalled," and the effort had now become increasingly devoted to refugee centers and relief. However, the Sitrep said 356 hamlets in the HOP TAC area had been reported by Vietnamese authorities as meeting agreed criteria and 927,000 persons were living in zones that had been declared clear. 141 At the time of the Johnson Mission, concern over the evident failures of the pacification program was such that proposals to change the frame-work within which it was conducted proposals to put the USOM, USIS and CIA pacification operations all under MACV were examined at length. Ambassadors Taylor and Alexis Johnson as well as General Westmoreland were opposed to sweeping changes of this sort. All apparently conceded the need for better coordination of the different kinds of programs, military and civil, which went into pacification but senior mission officials strongly opposed any major revision of the non-military effort. 109, 17 NSAM-328 Near the end of March Ambassador Taylor returned again to Washington for policy conferences. Four sets of proposals had been specifically developed for consideration at the 1 April meeting. One of these was General Johnsons report which has already been described in detail. Another was a suggested program of 12 covert actions submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. A third was an information program de-veloped by USIS. The fourth was a proposed program of 41 non-military measures initially suggested, by Ambassador Taylor, then worked on by State during the third week of March, and finally incorporated in a memorandum to the President dated 31 March. The 41 possible non-military actions proposed for consideration by Ambassador Taylor were arranged in 9 groups. Tile first group was entitled "Decentralization In The GVN and The Rural Program." This group included measures to urge the GVN to increase the power and responsibility of indi-vidual province chiefs, and to persuade the peasants they had a stake in the GVN by giving rural pacification a positive label, "new rural life hamlet program," and complexion. The second group of non-military actions concerned "Youth, Religion, and Other Special Groups." Within this group were a series of actions to expand the support of the GVN Ministry of Youth and Sports, to reduce the draft age from 20 to 18 or 17, to persuade the GVN to meet Montagnard grievances, and to increase aid to the Vietnamese labor movement. Under the heading "Economic and Social Measures," there were specific proposals to support a better coastal water transportation system and to urge the GVN to promulgate and put into effect an equitable land reform program. By sending U.S. and possibly nationalist Chinese experts it was hoped the GVN could be assisted in combating the growing VC capability to extract financial and material support from GVN resources. Measures were also urged to expand and accelerate slum clearance and low cost housing in troublesome urban areas and to improve the water supply. Specific measures advocated under the heading "Education" included a general increase in U.S. assistance, expansion of the program to translate American textbooks into Vietnamese and to establish secondary schools on American principles for Vietnamese students. Among the five specific measures under the rubric "Security and Intelligence," one urged promulgation of an effective arrest and detention law, another asked for a great increase in intelligence funds, a third called for a system of rewards for information leading to the capture or death of VC leaders, and the last was a suggestion for a national counterespionage organization. 110The "Psychological Operations" proposed were mainly additions to proposals already made in the USIS report of Mr. Rowan. The specific measures under "GVN Personnel" (and its systems, of recruiting and training officials for the rural program) were to urge the GVN to establish rewards for outstanding performance, and give double or triple pay to rural school teachers and officials. There were two measures to aid "Refugees in Emergency Situations" one to provide additional U.S. support for the refugee program, and the other to establish a joint U.S.GVN reaction team for quick survey and immediate action in war disaster situations. The last group of proposals was a revision of the old idea of encadre-ment of U.S. officers at key spots within the GVN. The administrative measures to increase U.S. effectiveness included such suggestions as allow-ing U.S. officers to work directly with special interest groups including Buddhists, Catholics, the sects, Montagnards, students, labor, etc.; and assigning other U.S. officers to work directly within the GVN, including the Prime Ministers office and key ministries. Another suggestion was for the establishment of a U.S. inter-agency group on pacification to be directed by a senior Mission officer reporting directly to the Ambassador. (This suggestion was evidently directed at the same problem as the suggestion for establishing all U.S. pacification effort under MACV that had arisen during the visit of General Johnson.) A feature of this proposed program that should be noted is that many if not most of the suggestions began with such phrases as "urge the GVN" or "persuade the GVN." This was of course not the first time that our assistance took this form. This had been going on for a long time. But the difference between merely supplying aid and also trying to supply initiative is significant. 142 In preparation for the important 1 April meeting a White House paper entitled "Key Elements For Discussion, Thursday, April 1, at 530 P.M." was circulated to participants. In summarizing the situation the paper said that morale had improved in South Vietnam and that, although the government had not really settled down, it seemed "hopeful both in its capacity and its sense of political forces." The South Vietnamese armed forces were in reasonably good shape although its top leadership was not really effective and the ratio of ARVN to VC (whose members were increasing) was not good enough. The situation in many parts of the countryside continued to go in favor of the VC although there was, at that writing, what was believed to be a temporary lull. Turning to the matter of the bombing this statement said that Hanoi has shown no signs of give, and Peiping has stiffened its position within the last week, we still believe that 111. attacks near Hanoi might substantially raise the odds of Peiping coming in with air. Hanoi was expected to continue stepping up its infiltration both by land through Laos and by sea. There were clear indications of different viewpoints in Hanoi, Peiping, and Moscow with respect to "so-called wars of liberation," as well as continued friction between Moscow and Peiping. However, neither such frictions nor the pressure of our present slowly ascending pace of air attacks on North Vietnam can be expected to produce a real change in Hanois position for some time, probably two to three months at best. The argument then proceeded to the key question of whether or not Hanoi would continue to make real headway in the South. If it continued to make such headway, even a major step-up in our air attacks would probably not make them much more reasonable. On the other hand if the situation in South Vietnam began to move against the VC and the going became increasingly tough, then the "situation might begin to move on a political trackbut again not in less than two to three months, in our present judgment." This was a significant departure from the theory for ROLLING THUNDER propounded when that bombing pressure was inaugurated. Following some considerations on immediate international moves and more general political posture, the memo turned to "actions within South Vietnam." Employing every useful resource to improve the efforts in the South was defined as crucial. The paper indicated that the 41-point program of non-military measures developed mainly by Ambassador Taylor included promising elements and that the mission as well as agencies in washington should develop additional points. McCones suggestions for largely covert actions were recommended for further study. Both the Rowan (USIS) and the 21-point program of General Johnson were viewed favorably, as well as an increase in U.S. military support forces in Vietnam from 18,000 to 20,000 men. An increase in GVN manpower was also approved with increased pay scales to be used as an inducement regardless of the monetary costs. On one copy of this document that went to OSD, there was a handwritten additional point that was, "change mission of Marine force." This significant addition was later adopted in NSAM-328. The remainder of the paper was devoted, first, to U.S. and third country combat forces in South Vietnam, and second, to actions against North Vietnam and in Laos. These are of interest here only in the extent to which they distracted from or supplanted counterinsurgency actions within South Vietnam. So far as U.S. combat forces within South Vietnam were concerned, there was cautious consideration of a small and gradual buildup. But it was emphasized that because the reaction of the GVN and112of the South Vietnamese people to any major U.S. combat deployment was uncertain, and because the net effectiveness of U.S. combat forces in the Vietnamese environment was also uncertain, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense had recommended that action of this sort be limited. Only the deployment of two additional Marine battalions, one Marine air squadron and certain logistical forces over the ensuing sixty-day period was approved. Continuation of ROLLING THUNDER operations on a slowly ascending scale was assumed. It was also assumed that preparations would be made for additional strikes and for a response to any higher level of VC operations, as well as, correspondingly, to slow the pace in the unlikely event that VC actions slacked off sharply. 143 In the NSC meeting of 1 April 1965, the President gave his formal approval, "subject to modifications in the light of experience," to the 41-point program of non-military actions submitted by Ambassador Taylor and described above. He gave general approval to the USIS recommendations, except that no additional funds were to be supplied for this work the program was to be funded and supported by other agencies. The President further approved the urgent exploration of the covert actions proposed by the Director of Central Intelligence. Finally, he repeated his previous approval of the 21-point program of military actions recommended by General Johnson. On the exclusively military side the President authorized the 18,000 to 2O,OOO-man increase in U.S. military support forces, the deployment of two additional Marine battalions, and the change of mission for all Marine battalions to permit their use in active combat under conditions to be established and approved by the Secretary of Defense in consultation with the Secretary of State. However, because this last decision was contingent upon future agreements between the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense its full significance was not immediately apparent. It was left to the Ambassador to seek South Vietnamese government approval and coordina-. tion for all of these measures. 144 NSAM-328 did not last long as a full and current statement of U.S. policy. There were some responsible officials who had misgivings about increasing our involvement in South Vietnam or about increasing it more rapidly than might be necessary. There were others who apparently felt that NSAM-328 risked falling between two stools. One such was John A. McCone, Director of CIA (who was perhaps also unhappy about the increasing involvement per se). The day after the 1 April meeting he addressed a memorandum expressing second thoughts to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and Ambassador Taylor. The change in the U.S. role from merely giving advice and static defense, to active combat operations against Viet Cong guerrillas, appeared to bother him. He felt our ground force operations would very possibly have only limited effectiveness against guerrillas, and above all, he felt the conduct of active combat operations in 113' . South Vietnam should be accompanied by air strikes against the North sufficiently heavy and damaging to really hurt the North. If the U.S. were to combine combat operations in the South with air strikes of any kind in the North, the attacks on the North should be heavy and do great damage, without expressly saying so, his point seems to have been that the air war against the North should not be an attempt to persuade, but an effort to compel. He said that he had already reported thatThe strikes to date have not caused a change in the North Vietnamese policy of directing Viet Cong insurgency, infiltrating cadres and supplying materials. If anything, the strikes to date have hardened their attitude. Although the memo as a whole conveys Mr. McCones serious doubt that the ground operations in the South would in any event serve their purpose, he clearly advocated bombing more heavily if we decided to engage in ground operations. Unless they were supported by really strong actions against North Vietnam, he felt such ground operations would be doomed to failure I believe our proposed track offers great danger of simply encouraging Chinese Communists and Soviet support of the DRV and VC cause if for no other reason than the risk for both will be minimurn. I envision that the reaction of the NVN and the Chinese Communists will be to deliberately, carefully, and probably gradually, build up the Viet Cong capabilities by covert infiltration of North Vietnamese and, possibly, Chinese cadres and thus bring an ever Increasing pressure on our forces. In effect, we will find ourselves mired down in combat in the jungle in a military effort we cannot win, and from which we will have extreme difficulty in extracting ourselves. McCone argued that if we were going to change the mission of the U.S. ground forces we also needed to change the ground rules of the strikes against North Vietnam, and he concluded If we are unwilling to take this kind of a decision now, we must not take the actions concerning the mission of our ground forces for the reasons I have mentioned above. 145 McCones views notwithstanding, U.S. policy was promptly and sharply reoriented in the direction of greater military involvement with a proportionate de-emphasis of the direct counterinsurgency efforts. It is not fully clear to this writer exactly how and why this rapid re-orientation occurred. On 7 April the President made his famous Johns Hopkins speech in which he publicly committed the United States more than ever before to the defense of South Vietnam, but also committed himself to engage in 114 .By NWD Date 201 1 unconditional discussions. The following day, Pham Van Dong published his Four Points in what seemed a defiant, and unyielding response. This sharp DRV rebuff of the Presidents initiative may well have accelerated the re-orientation. The re-orientation of policy itself, however, was expressed not in an explicit restatement of formal policy, but in a series of action decisions over the follovring fortnight that caught the Saigon Mission very much by surprise. The Ambassador's nodis to the President on 13 April had a comparatively optimistic tone. It began, "Ue have just completed another quite favorable week in terms of losses inflicted upon the Viet Cong" The critical conditions in Bien Dinh Province had been considerably relieved and the province, it was believed, was about back to normal. Although a large part of the province remained under Viet Cong control, many areas had been re-stored to government control and the fear of the loss of major towns seemed past. There had been aggressive action by a new division commander, and there seemed to be improved morale attributable to the air actions against North Vietnam. There was a possibility that the Viet Cong were regrouping and they would probably soon engage in some new kind or phase of offensive action, But, then as now, there were what some interpreted as indications that the Viet Cong morale might be dropping. Furthermore, estimates not audited figures indicated that the government military and paramilitary forces had been increased by some 10,000 during the month of March as against the target of 8,000 per month. Prime Minister Quat was continuing his program of visiting the provinces, and in addition to making himself and the Saigon government known to the hinterlands, he had expressed parti-cular interest in such projects as rural electrification, agricultural development, water supply and school construction. Quats principal worry continued to be the unruly generals and there was continued evidence of disunity within the senior officers corps. 146 within two days, however, messages went out from washington indicating that decisions had been made at the highest level to go beyond the measures specified in NSAM-328, On 15 April, McGeorge Bundy sent a personal nodis to Ambassador Taylor saying that the President had just approved important future military deployments and that some personal explanation might be helpful. The President has repeatedly emphasized his personal desire for a strong experiment in the encadrement of U.S. troops with the Vietnamese. He is also very eager to see prompt experiments in use of energetic teams of U.S. officials in support of pro-visional governments under unified U.S. leadership. These desires arethe source of corresponding paragraphs in our message. On further troop deployments, the Presidents belief is that current situation requires use of all practical means of streng-thening position in South Vietnam and that additional U.S. troops .115are important if not decisive reinforcements. He has not seen evidence of negative result of deployments to date, and does not wish to wait any longer than is essential for genuine GVN agreement. President always intended these plans be reviewed with you and approved by Quat before final execution, and we regret any contrary impression given by our messages in recent days. 147 The message stated that "highest authority" believed that, in addition to the actions against the North, something new had to be added in the South, to achieve victory. 1. Experimental encadrement by U.S, forces of South Vietnamese ground troops both to stiffen and increase their effectiveness and also to add to their fire power. Two approaches were to be carried out concurrently, one involving integration of a substantial number of U.S. combat personnel in each of several ARVN battalions, the other involving the combined operation of approximately three addi-tional ArmyMarine battalions with three or more South Vietnamese battalions for use in combat operations. 2. Introduction of a brigade force into the Bien Hoa-Vung Tau area to act both as a security force for installations and to participate in counterinsurgency combat operations, 3. Introduction of a battalion or multi-battalion forces into three additional locations along the coast, such as Qui Nhon. The purpose here would be to experiment further with using U.S. forces in counterinsurgency role in addition to providing security for the base. In addition to these three steps, which were intended basically to increase the military effectiveness of the counterguerrilla campaign, a series of other steps was proposed. One was a substantial expansion of the Vietnamese recruiting campaign using U.S. recruting experts, tech-niques and procedures. A second was an experimental program to provide expanded medical services to the countryside utilizing mobile dispensaries. The next one and the one that caused considerable subsequent dis-cussion -- was the experimental introduction into the provincial government structure of a team of U.S. Army civil affairs personnel to assist in the establishment of stable provincial administration and to initiate and direct the necessary political, economic and security programs. It 116was proposed that teams be introduced first into only one or two provinces. General Peers was being sent to work with COMUSMACV in developing detailed plans. The last non-military measure was an experimental plan for distributing food directly to regular and paramilitary personnel and their families. 148 Hot on the heels of this message came another on 16 April explaining in some further detail the proposition to experiment with U.S. civil affairs officers in the pacification program. Major General W. R. Peers party was scheduled to arrive in Saigon on 19 April. According to the proposal COMUSMACV was to designate a senior officer to direct the overall U.S. Army Civil Affairs effort in the one or two test provinces, within these, the responsibility for all U.S. activities would be vested in the seniorU.S. Army sector advisor, lip This last message was, for Taylor, the straw that broke the camels back. Immediately upon receiving it the Ambassador dispatched a NODIS to McGeorge Bundy Contrary to the firm understanding which I received in washington, I was not asked to concur in this massive visitation. For your information, I do not concur. Based on the little I know of the proposed civil .affairs experiment, I am opposed to beginning any extensive planning exercise which, because of its controversial and divisive concept, is going to shake this mission and divert senior members from their important daily tasks. If GVN gets word of these plans to impose U.S. military government framework on their country (as this new concept seems to imply), it will have a very serious impact on our relations here. we are rocking the boat at a time when we have it almost on an even keel. I recommend that we suspend action on this project until we have time to talk over its merits and decide how to proceed with order. 160 Shortly after dispatching this telegram, the Ambassador sent another to McGeorge Bundy, this one dealing more generally with the defense message of 15 April which had laid out the new program of added measuresdecided upon by the President. I am greatly troubled by DoD 152339Z April 15. First, it shows no consideration for the fact that, as a result of decisions taken in Washington during my visit, this mission is 117charged with securing implementation by the two-month old Quat government of a 21-point military program, a 41-point non-military program, a 16-point Rowan USIS program and a 12-point CIA program. Now this new cable opens up new vistas of further points as if we can win here somehow on a point score. We are going to stall the machine of government if we do not declare a moratorium on new programs for at least six months. Next, it shows a far greater willingness to get into the ground war than I had discerned in washington during ny recent trip... My greatest concern arises over para 6 reftel the civil affairs experiment proposal which frankly bewilders me. What do the authors of this cable think the mission has been doing over the months and years? We have presumably the best quali re people e Washington agencies (State, AID, DoD, USIA and-IA.) can in 'or., ing in the provinces seven days a week at precisely as e scribed in paragraph 6. Is it proposed to withdraw se Pop e and replace them by Army civil affairs types operating on ne pattern of military occupation? If this is the thoug c,wou regard such a change in policy which would gain .iue pul xci y, disastrous in its likely efforts upon pacification in genera an on USGVN relations in particular. Mac, cant we be better protected from our friends. I know that everyone wants to help, but there is such a t-iing as i i g with kindness. In particular, we want to stay alive nere ecau e we think were winning and will continue to win un ess e pe to death. 151 Shortly after sending this cable, the Ambassador sent still a third message, this one suggesting certain steps that might be en in as ington to facilitate his implementation of the many andlaprc y c ang ng policies and programs that had been decided upon in Wasnmg on -.rnce r visit. The problem was winning not only the acquiescence, u' e suppor and active cooperation of the South Vietnamese government. e sugges e the kind of instruction that washington should provide nim o presen o the GVN the new policy of third country participation in ground combat. Taylor's proposed instructions are quoted in full here because ey pro-vide, for better or worse, an internally consistent rationale or c -e shifting policies of that month The USG has completed a thorough review of the situation in South Vietnam both in its national and interna xn S and has reached certain important conclusions. It s in recent weeks there has been a somewhat favorable c ange in the overall situation as the result of the air attacks on e,118the relatively small but numerous successes in the field against the VC and the encouraging progress of the Quat government. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that, in all probability, the primary objective of the GVN and the USG of changing the will of the DRV to support the VC insurgency cannot be attained in an acceptable time frame by the methods presently employed. The air campaign in the North must be supplemented by signal successes against the VC in the South before we can hope to create that frame of mind in Hanoi which will lead to the decisions we seek. The JCS have reviewed the military resources which will be available in SVN by the end of 1965 and have concluded that even with an attainment of the highest feasible mobilization goals, ARVN will have insufficient forces to carry out the kind of suc-cessful campaign against the VC which is considered essential for the purposes discussed above. If the ground war is not to drag into 1966 and even beyond, they consider it necessary to rein-force GVN ground forces with about twenty battalion equivalents in addition to the forces now being recruited in SVN. Since these reinforcements cannot be raised by the GVN they must inevitably come from third country sources. The USG accepts the validity of this reasoning of the JCS and offers its assistance to the GVN to raise these additional forces for the purpose of bringing the VC insurgency to an end in the shortest possible time. We are prepared to bring in additional U.S. ground forces provided we can get a reasonable degree of participation from other third countries. If the GVN will make urgent representations to them, we believe it will be entirely possible to obtain the follotring contributions Korea, one regimental combat team; Australia, one Infantry battalion; New Zealand, one battery and one company of tanks; Philippine Islands, one battalion. If the forces of the foregoing magnitude are forthcoming, the USG is prepared to provide the remainder of the combat reinforcements as well as the necessary logistic personnel to support the third country contingents. Also, it will use its good offices as desired in assisting the GVN approach to these governments. You (the Ambassador), will seek the concurrence of the GVN to the foregoing program, recognizing that a large number of questions such as command relationships, concepts of employment and disposition of forces must be worked out subsequently. The message concluded that, armed with an instruction of thi u, kind, he, Taylor, would be adequately equipped to initiate wra mrg 1 e 119sharp debate within the GVN. Something of this sort was needed before taking up the matter of troop arrangements with Quat. 152 Later the same day, Deputy Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson sent Wash-ington his personal observations on the recent decision to introduce third country troops. He had just returned from one day at Pleiku with Premier Quat, and two days in the Danang-Hue area, where he had had "ex-tended visits and informal conversations with all of the senior Marine officers ashore." I fully appreciate considerations both internal and external to SVN which impel move on our part to bring this war to successful conclusion as quickly as possible...However, I gravely question whether this result can be achieved at this time by massive input of non-Vietnamese military forces. As we have learned, we are dealing with volatile and hyper-sensitive people with strong zeno-phobic characteristics never far below the surface. Ue have thus far deployed our Marine battalions to minimize direct contact with local population. This not only from our choice but that of GVN, especially General Thi. On this I think Thi is right. Hasty and ill conceived deployment of non-Vietnamese in combat roles where they are substantially involved with local population could badly backfire on U.S. and give rise to cries by Buddhists...and others to 'throw out foreigners and 'return Vietnam to the Vietnamese... The message went on to say that in the next few weeks the Marines at Danang would-rave a chance to test their success as a reaction force in support of ARVi. initiated contact with the enemy, and in patrolling thinly populated areas. The Deputy Ambassador recommended that we await the outcome of this testing before engaging any more forces. 153 A hastily arranged meeting in Honolulu on 20 April was evidently called to soothe Taylors temper over the hasty decisions to deploy third country troops, and to get agreement to them by the senior U.S. policy officials concerned not to reverse or alter those policies or to shift the direction of our commitments. By that point we were inexorably com-mitted to a military resolution of the insurgency. The problem seemed no longer soluble by any other means. 120 . FOOTNOTES . IwC.l. FOOTNOTES 1. White House Statement to the Press, 2 October 1963 2. National Security Action Memorandum 273, 26 November 1963 (TS) 3. Ibid. 4. Ibid. 5. Ibid. 6. Secretary Robert S. McNamara Memorandum for the President, "Report of the McNamara-Taylor Mission to South Vietnam, 2 October 1963 (TS) 7. Ibid. 8. Chairman, JCS Maxwell Taylor Letter to President Ngo Dinh Diem, 30 September 1963 9. Ibid. 10. Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara Testimony Regarding the Situation in South Vietnam Before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Executive Session), not subsequently published, 8 October 1963 (S) 11. Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara Testimony on Authorization Bill for Fiscal 1965 Before the House Committee on Armed Services (Executive Session), 27 and 29 January. 1964 (S) 12. Ibid. 13- Ibid. 14. Roger Hilsman, To Move a Nation (New York Doubleday and Co., 1967), p- 502 15. "Critical Analysis of Halberstam Article," in Secretary of Defense Briefing Book, 16 (?) August 1953 (8) 16. "History of War In Vietnam, 1961-63," in Secretary of Defense Briefing Book (September 1963) 17. Ibid. 18. "Second Informal Appreciation of the Strategic Hamlet Program," 1 September 1963 (S) 12119. McNamara-Taylor Trip Report, op. cit. 20. "Summary of Special Meeting on the Republic of Vietnam, CINCPAC Headquarters," 20 November 1963 (TS) 21. Secretary of Defense Memorandum for the President, Subject "Meeting with Ambassador Lodge," 23 November 1963 (TS) 22.Draft Memorandum to the President on Status of Actions Under NSAM-273, attached to memorandum from Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, to Secretary of State, Director CIA, and Secretary of Defense, and Administrator .AID,' to serve as a basis of discussion at a meeting at 300 p.m., 6 December 1963 (TS) 23. Embassy Saigon message 1122, to Secretary of State, 7 December 1963 (S-LIMDIS) 24. Assistant Secretary of DefenseISA Memorandum to the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Subject "Situation in Vietnam," No. 1-2913563, 17 December 1963, signed by Admiral Blouin (S) 25. Back-Up Book for Secretary of Defense Saigon Trip, 18-20 December 1963 (TS) 26. OSD message DEF.949322 to CINCPAC, 21 December 1963 (TS) 27. Secretary of Defense Memorandum for the President, Subject "Trip to South Vietnam," 21 December 1963 (TS) 28. Remarks of the Secretary of Defense at the White House, 21 December 1963 29. CIA Director John McCone Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, 23 December 1963 (TS) 30. CIA Director John McCone Letter to the Secretary of Defense, 7 January 1964 (TS) 31. CIA Director John McCone Letter to the Secretary of Defense, 9 January 1964 (TS) 32. Secretary of Defense Letter to CIA Director John McCone, 16 January 1964 (TS) 33. William E. Colby, Deputy DirectorPlans, CIA Memorandum for Secretary of Defense, et.al., Subject "Initial Report of CAS Group Findings in South Vietnam," 10 February 1964 (S) 122-34. MACV message 665, to Taylor, 21 February 1964 (TS) 35. Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara Testimony Before the House Armed Services Committee (Executive Session), 27 January 1964 36. Embassy Saigon message 1345, 20 January 1964, 800 p.m. (C) 37. Embassy Saigon message 1408, 23 January 1964 (U) 38. CAS, Saigon message, 23 January 1964 (no message number available) 39. Embassy Saigon message 1431, 29 January 1964, 800 p.m. (TS-NODIS) 40. Embassy Saigon message 1445, 30 January 1964, 315 a.m. (TS); see also messages 1403, 1431, and 1432, op. cit. 41. Embassy Saigon message 1456, 1 February 1964 (S) 42. Embassy Saigon Airgram U55, 2 February 1064 (S) 43- Ibid. 44. Ibid. 45. Ibid. 46. Embassy Saigon message 1523, 9 February 1964 (S) 4y. Walter Elder, Executive Assistant to Director CIA Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, Subject ".Appraisal of the Conduct of the War in Vietnam,10 February 1964 (s); de SilvaKirkpatrick -evaluation attached. 48. Ibid. 49. SNIE 50-64, "Short-Term Prospects in Southeast Asia," 12- February 1964 (TS) 50. Assistant Secretary of StateFar East, Roger Hilsman Memorandum for the Secretary of State, 14 March 1964 (TS) 51. Chairman, JCS Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, JCSM-146-64, 18 February 1964 (TS-SENSITIVE) 52. JCS, SACSA Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, Subject "Appraisal of the Situation in SVN," 3 March 1964, in Secretary of Defense Trip Book (TS) 53. Ibid. 54. Ibid. 123.55. Joint StateDefense message, State's 1307 to Emoassy Saigon, 25 February 1964, 835 Pm. (S)56. Ibid. 57. Ibid. 58. Embassy Saigon message 1744, 13 March 1964 (S) 59. NSAM 273, op. cit. 60. National Security Action Memorandum 288, 17 March 1964 (1S) 61. Ibid. 62. Ibid.63. Ibid. 64. Ibid.65 White House Statement to the Press,- 17 March 196466. State Department message 1462 to Saigon and others, 18 March 19o4 (TSpLIMDIS) 67. Chairman, JCS Memorandum for the Secretary of Deiense, JCSM-222-64, 14 March 1964 (TS) 68. State Department message 1490 to Saigon, 20 March 1964 (S) 69. Embassy Saigon message 1880, 1 April 1964 (S) 70. These and other data concerning the progress or lack thereofon the NSAM-288 measures during this period are taken from compilations included in "Mid-May Saigon Briefing Book." 71. Embassy Saigon message 2091, 30 April 1964 (S) 72. Mid-May Saigon Briefing Book, op. cit. 73. Embassy Saigon messages 1889, 2 April 1964; 1899, 3 April 1964; 2089, 30 April 1964; and 2112, 4 May 1964 74. Mid-May Saigon Briefing Book, op. cit. 75. Joint State-Defense-AID message 1505, 23 May 1964 76. JCS message to MACw6073, 29 April 1964, 77. MACV msg to JCS DIG O70725May64 78. Mid-May Saigon briefing book, op. cit. 79. Ibid. 80. Saigon Mid-May briefing book; Report of General Earle 0. Wheeler, Chief of Staff, USA on visit to the Republic of Vietnam representing the SecDef and the JCS, 15-20 April 1964 (TS). 81. W. P. Bundy, Memo for the Record, Subject "Discussion of Possible Extended Action in Relation to Vietnam," 27 April 1964 (TS). 82. Mid-May Saigon briefing book. 83. Embassy Saigon msg 2108, 4 May 1964 (TS). 84. Department of State msg 1838, from the Secretary 5 May !?, Flash (TS); Embassy Saigon msg 2108, 4 May 1964 (TS). 85 See the Task Force Paper IwC.5 "Evolution of the War, Military Pressures Against North Vietnam Action and Debate, February to June 196)+," (TSSensitlve). 86. OSD msg Def 966914 4 May 1964 (S). 87. Mid-May Saigon briefing book. 88. Memo for the Record,Subject "U.S. Embassy Briefing, Saigon 12 May 1964," by LCol Sidney B,Berry, 3rJ USA (S). 89. Memo for the Record, Subject 11 SecDef-COMUSMACV Meeting, 1430-1745, 12 May 1964," by Col. Charles Mount, USA (S). 90. Memo for the Record, Subject "SecDef-COMUSMACV Conference, 0900-1300, 13 May 1964," by Col. Charles Mount, USA (S). 91- Tbid. 92. Second SecDef-I-1ACV Conference Report, MAC JOI-3849, 14 May 1964 (TS). 93. Memo for the Record, Subject "SecDef Decisions, Saigon, 13 May 1964," by Sidney B. Berry, Jr., LCol, USA (S). 94. Embassy Saigon msg 2203, 14 May 1964 (S). 95. State Department msg 2087, 26 May 1964 (TS-NODIS). 96. State Department msg 2095, 27 May 1964-, 614 p.m. (TS). 12597- Backup book for Honolulu Conference on 30 May 1964 (TS). 98. JCS msg 2625-611, Taylor to Felt and Harkins, 28 May 1964 (TS). 99. Backup book for Honolulu Conference on 30 May 1964 (TS). 100. "Proposed Actions in Political Problem Areas in Vietnam, in Briefing Book for Honolulu Conference, 30 May 1964 (TS). 101. Department of State msg 2184, 5 June 1964 (S). 102. McGeorge Bundy Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense and Secretary of State, 15 June 1964, with six enclosures (TS). 103. Ibid, enclosure 1. 104. Flid, enclosure 2. 105. Embassy Saigon msg DTG O71O1OZJU164 (C); unnumbered Embassy Saigon msg, 8 July 1964, SEA Cable FilesJune-July 1964. 106. State Department msg 108, for the Ambassador from the President., 10 July 1964, 820 p.m. (S). 107. Embassy Saigon msgs 109 and 108, 15 July 1964 (S). 108. See Task Force Paper TwC. pp. 32-33 109. CIA Saigon msg 35014, 24 July 1964 (S). 110. Embassy Saigon msg 203, 24 July 1964 (S). 111. Enibassy Saigon msgs 215, 24 July 1964 (TS); and 232, 27 July l94 (TS). 112. Embassy Saigon msg 213, 25.July 1964 (TS). 113- Embassy Saigon msg 377, to State for the President, DTG lO14O7ZAug64 (S EXDIS). 114. COMUSMACV msg to DIA 8542, DTG 221105ZAug64 (S). 115. Shaplen, Robert, The Lost Revolution, (New York, 1965), PP- 268-270. 116. Shaplen, op.cit., pp. 268-270. 117. Saigon msg 393, 12O735ZAug64 (S). 118. Shaplen, op.cit., p. 271. 119. State Department msg 439, 14 Aug 1964 (TS). 120. Embassy Saigon msg 465, 18 Aug 1964 (TS). 126121. State Department msg 481, 20 Aug 1964, 402 p.m. (S). 122. Shaplen, op.cit., pp. 271-272. 123- Ibid., pp. 272-275. 124. Ibid., pp. 275-278. 125. IwC. p. 41. 12o. Shaplen, op.cit. 127. Embassy Saigon msg 768, 6 Sep 1964 (TS-NODIS). 128. Memo from AASDlSA Peter Solbert to SecDef 1-13, 34362; Subject "RAND Study on South Vietnam". 129. NSAM 314, 10 Sep 1964 (TS). 130. Shaplen, op.cit., pp. 286-289. 131. Embassy Saigon msg 1035, 6 Oct 1964- (TS-EXDIS). 132. Shaplen, op.cit., pp. 291-292. 133- COMUSMACV Memorandum for Ambassador Taylor; Subject "Assessment of the Military Situation," 24 Nov 1964, MACV J01 (S). 134. Secretary of Defense Memorandum to the Chairman, JCS, 13 Jan 1965 ASDISA Memorandum to the Secretary of Defense, 11 Jan 1965; JCSM 1047-64, 17 Dec 1964 (S). 135. JCS 2343499, 3 Dec 1964 (TS); "Note by the Secretary, of the JCS on Ambassador Taylors Visit, Enclosing Draft Instructions, etc." 136. Shaplen, op.cit., pp. 290-296. 137. DISM-744-65, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, 26 June 1965 (S). 138. Saigon msg of 7 Mar 1965, "Ambassador Taylors Analysis of the Overall Situation in Vietnam", included in General Johnsons' "Report on Survey of the Military Situation in Vietnam", Tab A. (S). 139. Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, CJCS, CNO, CSUSAF, Commandant, USMC from General H. K. Johnson, CSUSA; "Report on Survey of the Military Situation in Vietnam," 14- Mar 1965 (S). 140. HQUSMACV, Monthly Evaluation Report, March I.965 (s) 141. Deptel 2065 Immediate to Saigon, 24 Mar 1965 (SLIMDIS). 127. ,I-rr- 142. Ibid. Although this message predates the Taylor memo of 31 March, it is believed to be, if not identical, substantially the same, because the available copy of it indicates that extra copies for information were sent out to other officials as late as 14 April. 143. Unsigned White House memoSubject "Key Elements for Discussion Thursday, April 1 at 530 p.m.", April 1, 1965 (TS). Probably prepared by McGeorge Bundy. 144. NSAM 328, 6 April 1965 (TS). 145. Memorandum for the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and Ambassador Maxwell D. Taylor, 2 April 1965, from the Director of CIA, John A. McCone. 146. Embassy Saigon msg 3359 to SecState for the President priority 13 Apr 1965 (TS-NODIS). 147- Deptel 2332, 15 Apr 1965, 346 p.m., (TS-NODIS). 148. Joint State-Defense msg 009164, DTG 152339ZApri165 (TS-LIMDIS). 149. Department of the Army msg to COMUSMACV (info for Embassy Saigon), DTG 161459ZApr65 (TS). 150. Embassy Saigon msg 3419, Ambassador Taylor to McGeorge Bundy, 17 April 1965 (TS-NODIS). 151. Embassy Saigon msg 3421 to State for McGeorge Bundy, 17 Apr 1965 (TS-NODIS). 152. Embassy Saigon msg 3423 to SecState (in two sections) 17 Apr 1965 immediate (TS-EXDIS). 153. Embassy Saigon msg 3432, 17 Apr 1965 (TS). 128 