.     VI. B Settlement of the Conflict (6 Vols.) Negotiations. 1965-67 Announce Position Statements 1945 1967      ) UNITED STATES VIETNAM RELATIONS VIETNAM TASK FORCE= OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE SeO . v. ...      o Part VI.B. NEGOTIATIONS IQ65 196? ANNOUNCED FOS1TION STATEMENTSerm x Sec Def Coot fc-      VI. B. NEGOTIATIONS 19651967 ANNOUNCED POSITION STATEMENTS TABLE OF CONTENTS. ' Page 1. U.S. POSITION STATEMENTS... 1 1963. 1 1965. 3 1966 30 1967.. 35 2. NVN POSITION STATEMENTS..."... .. 98 Extracts from NVN Statements 1962-1965 .. 100 April-October 1965.. 133 1967.. 177 3- NFLSV POSITION STATEMENTS 188 1961. .1.89 1965... 193 1966... 208 1967.. 222 4. ADDENDA... 235 Hanoi Attitude on Bombing 10 September 1967... 236 Chronology of Viet Peace Efforts Dec 1966-Feb 1967 237 The Ashmore Letter to Ho Chi Minh 5 Feb 1967 238 Publication of Ashmore Peace Feeler Attempts New York Times... , 239 Washington Post... 241 Comparison of Ashmore-IBJ Letters 244 New York T5r.-s Account of State Department Denial of Ashmore Charges. 245 State Department Oct -ent on Ashmore Episode (Bundy).. 246 State Department Press Conference Held by Wm. P. Bundy on Ashmore Episode 247 . i .     1. US POSITION STATEMENTS (UNCLASSIFIED) . lUPEI- ... Subj oct Page Statement by McGeorge Bundy, September 30, 1963... 1 White House Policy Statement, October 2, 1963. 2 Rusk's News Conference, February 25, 1965. 3 Pattern for Peace Address by President Johnson, April 7, 1965. 12 ; Speech, "Day for International Aid," June 22, 1965 16 . White House Press Conference.. 17 Letter from President Johnson to U Thant, July 28, 1965... 20 Letter from Ambassador Goldberg to Security Council, July 30, 1965... 20 Correspondence with Foreign Minister Fanfani, Nov-Dec 1965 22 Statement Concerning 1964 Peace Overtures. 24 Secretary Rusk's News Conference, November 26, 1965... 2? Letter from Ambassador Goldberg to U Thant, January 5, 1966... 30 State Department Press Release (14 Points), January 7, 1966... 31 Extract from State of Union Message, January 12, 1966. 32 Address by Ambassador Goldberg to United Nations, . February 10, 1967.. 35 President Johnsons Letter to Ho Chi Minh, February 8, 1967... 45 Ho Chi Minh's Reply to Johnsen's Letter. February 10, 1967 47 1 , ' . 7.;.. 49 "The Fath to Vietnam," August 15, 1967 72 Ambassador Goldberg's Speech to the Uhitcd Nations, September 21, 196?. ... 74 ii      Subject Page San Antonio Formula, September 29, 1967 78 Ambassador Goldberg at Senate Foreign Relations Committee, November 2, 1967 84     By NWD Date 201 1 . U.S. Position Statements .     THE NEXT STEPS TOWARD PEACE Statement by Mc-Georgc Bundy, Special Assistant to the President, September 30, 1963 (Excerpts)1 .     The difficult situation in the troubled country of South Viet-Nam is one which I have even less desire to discuss, in substantive terms, than the other questions I have taken as examples. The important mission of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara and General Maxwell I). Taylor is only just ending, and it would be wholly in-anproprmte for me to comment on the course of action which may ba chosen in the light of this mission and of the continuing consideration which is going forward in Saigon under the leadership of Ambassador Hent y Cabot Lodge, and also in Washington. Yet'll is not wrong, I think, to suggest that in this case again there are two propositions, both of them true, and two kinds of error which Can result from an unwillingness to accept them both. And again both propositions have been stated clearly by the President. The first is that the object of American policy in this part of the world is to assist in a most difficult and important struggle against Communist subversionmilitary, paramilitary, and political. The-commitment of tho United States to the independence of South Viet-Nam goes back many years. This commitment was intensified and reinforced 2 years ago, and Since, then a major cooperative effort has been carried forward with increasing energyand at least until recently with increasing suc-cesSby Americans working closely with the people and Government of South Viet-Nam. It is the policy of the United States to sustain that effort. Yet it would be folly for the United States to neglect, or to regard with indifference, political developments of recent months which raise questions about the ability of the Government and people ci South Viet-Nam to support each other effectively in their contest with communism. The President has made it clear that the United States is not indifferent to these events and regards them with great concern. It is and must be the nolicy of the United States Government to make clear its interest in whatever improvements it judges to be neco.-;. try, always of course with a proper regard for responsibilities which rest in the first instance upon the people of South" Viet-Nam. Tt is no secret that observers of the scene in South Viet-Nam have often differed sharply in their interpretation of events. From these differences there have come divergent recommendations for policy. There is nothing discreditable in the existence of such differences. In a situation in which easy solutions do not exist and in which commitments of purpose and hope are high, it is only natural that there should be a tendency in each observer to emphasize the part of the truth to which he is nearest. If a particular antisubversive e-ori is going well, the man who is working on that eJort is bound to sea that part of reality as very large. If in the cities there is rerrnsicn and alienation of publi? support, men living in those cities, with responsibilities more civil than military, will feel a special ant intense 1 Department of State BaTIeHn, Oct. 21.1033. pp. 625629. 1      U.S. POLICY OX VIET-NAM WHITE HOUSE STATEMENT, OCTOBER 2, 19G3 Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNr.mara and General Maxwell 11. Taylor reported to the President this morning and to the National Security Council this afternoon. Their report included a number of classified findings and recommendations which will be the Subject of further review and action. Their basic presentation was endorsed by r.ll members of the. Security Council and the following statement of United States policy was approved by the President on the basis of recommendations received from them and from Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge.  1. The security of South Viet-Nam is a major interest of the United States as other free nations. We will adhere to our policy of working with the people and Government of South Viet-Nam to deny this country to communism and to suppress the externally stimulated and supported insurgency of the Viet Cong as promptly as possible. Effective performance in this undertaking is the central objective of our policy in South Viet-Nam2. Tho military program in South Viet-Nam has made progress and is sound in principle, though improvements are being energetically sought.   ' ... 3. Major U.S. assistance in support of this military effort is needed only until the. insurgency has been suppressed or until tho national security forces of the Government of South Viet-Nam are capable of suppressing it. Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their judgment that tho major part of the U.S. military task can be completed by the end of 1965, although there may be a continuing requirement for a limited number of U.S. training personnel. They reported that by tho end of this year, the U.S. program for training Vietnamese should have progressed to the point where 1.000 U.S. military personnel assigned to South Viet-Nam can be withdrawn. 4. The political situation in South Viet-Nam remains deeply serious. Tho United States has made clear its continuing opposition to any repressive actions in South Viet-Nam. "While such actions have not yet significantly affected the military effort, they could do so in the future.  5. It remains the policy of the United States, in South Viet-Nam as in other parts of the world, to support the efforts of the people of that country to defeat aggression and to build a peaceful and free society. 1 Department of State Bulletin, oct 21,1963, p. 623.    NND 63316,  SITUATION Lx SOUTHEAST ASIA Secretary Rusks News Conference of February 25, 10653 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I should like to take a few moments of your time to try to draw together in the simplest 1N moSt fundamental way our attitude toward the situation in Southeast Asia. Some of the things which I Shall say will repeat what has been said before, but memones here and abroad seem to be sometimes shore. And it is important to repeat and draw together those matters which are at the center of the problem, because there is a great deal else which is peripheral and transitory.  ' 1. The nations of Southeast Asia have a right to live in peace, free from aggression directed against them from outside their borders. Now, this is not an empty theory; it is a point of vital importance to the safety and, indeed, the very existence of more than a hundred smaller nations all over the world. 2. North Viet-Nam, in callous disregard of the agreements of 1951 and 1962, and of international law, has directed and supplied the essential military personnel and arms for a systematic carnplgn of terror and guerrilla action aimed at the overthrow of the Government of South Viet-Nam and at the imposition by force of a Communist regime. The evidence of North Ylet-Nams direct responsibility for this aggression has been repeatedly presented by the Government of Viet-Nam, the United States Government, and the International Control Commission. A full and up-to-date summary of the evidence establishing this responsibility will be available to you within a very few days. It is now bling processed for publication. 3. Tho attitude of the United States toward threats to the peace in Southeast Asia has been made clear many times and in the most serious and formal ways (a) by the ratification of the Manila Pact in February 1955, which includes South Viet-Nam as a protocol state; (This treaty was approved by the Senate by a vote of S2 tol.) (b) bv a decision of President Eisenhower in 1951 to extend aid to South Vietnam, who said in a letter to the President of South Viet-Nam  The Implications of the agreement conCfrnlng Viet-Nam bare caused grave concern regarding the future ef a country temporarily divided by an artificial military grouping, weakened by a long and exhausting war and faced with enemies without and by their subversive collaborators within. and he went on to say that The purpose Of this offer is to assist the Government of Viet-Nam In developing and maintaining a strong, viable state, capable Of resisting attempted subversion or aggression through military means. and then again (c) by the joint resolution of the Congress of the United States, passed in August 1961 by a combined vote of 502 to 2, which stated, among other things That the Congress approves and supports the detemlnattoa of the President, as Commands- in Chiet, to take nil necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces cf ths United States and tO prevent further aggression. and that The United States regards as vital to its national interest and to world peace the maintenance of internattonal peace and security in southeast Asia. and that the United States is, therefore, prepared, as tbs President dstennlaes, to take all nect-mry steps, including the use cf armed force, to assist any member Or protOeol state cf the SOutheast Asia CcUectlre Defense Treaty re-questing asitstance ia defense of its freedom. s .     (d) and then you should remind yourselveS of the statement made . by President Johnson on the- occasion of signing that joint resolution To any armed attack upin our forces, we shall repty. To any in Southeast Asia who ask our help In defending their freedom, we shall give it. lu that region, there is nothing we covet, nettling we seekno territory, no military pontion, no political ambition. Our one desireour one determination is that the people of Southeast Asia be left in peace tO werk out their own destinies in their Own way. 4. Now, it has been stated over and over again that the key to peace . in Southcast Asia is the readiness of all those in that area to live at . peaCe and to leave their neighbors alene. Now, there is no mystery about that formulation; those who arehot leaving their neighborS alone know exactly what it means. It is an obligation under the 1954 agreements, under the 1962 accords on Laos, and under general interna tional law. The illegal infiltration of military personnel and arms cannot be described as "reaving vour neighbor alone." 5. TJtcre have been negotiated settlements in Southeast Asia, the most recent one as late as. 1902. Those several agreements were in. tended to establish peace in that area; compliance with them by all concerned can achieve that result. 6. Now, since the Geneva conference of 1962, the. United States has been in active and continuous consultation with other governments about the danger created by aggression in Southeast Asia. It has been discussed in the United Nation?, in the SEATO and NATO Councils, and on innumerable occasions directly with othex' governments through diplomatic channels. We have had direct discussions with almost every Signatory of the agreements of 1951 and 1962. What is still ' i missing is any indication that Hanoi is prepared to stop doing what I it is doing and what it knows it is doing against its nelo-hbors. The i absence of this crucial element affects the current discusSion of "neoo- tiation." Political channels ha vc bcen and a re open, and a considerable number of governments are actively interested in keeping them open to explore the possibilities of a peaceful solution. But a negotiation aimed at the acceptance or the confirmation of aggression is not possible. And a negotiation which simply ends in bitterness and hostility merely adds to the danger.  < '"7. Let me remind you that on February 17 the President said, and I am quoting As I have said so many, many times, and other Presidents ahead of me bare Said, our purpose, our objective there is clear. That purpose and that objective is to join tn the defense and prOtcction of freedom of a brave people who arc under attack that is controlled and that is directed from outside their country. IVe have no ambition there for ourselves. IVe seek no dominion. We seek no conquest 3Ve seek no wider war. But we must all understand that we will persist in the defense of freedom and our continuing actions will be those which are juSttfied and these that are made necessary by the continuing aggression of others. These actions be added will be measured and fitting and adequate, our stamina and the stamina ef the American people Is equal to the taskLet me conclude by reaffirming, still once more, that the central object of American policy and action in peace in Southeast Asia and the safety of the independent states in that region. JIany of the peoples of that area have been subjected to 25 years of tunnoil and vtolence; they are entitled to peace. Wc ourselves much prefer to use our reSourceS as a part of an international effort to assist the economic and social development of the peoples of that-area than to have them diverted into the harsh necessities of resisting aggression. I am ready for your questions, gentlemen. s I' 4      Q. Mr. Secretary, what is the association of the United States Government with the activities of these nations you referred to which are trying to keep open the channels of diplomacy? A. Well, we are ourselves in regular contact with many govern-ments in all parts of the world, through diplomatic means. We have not seen any basis on which we can ask anyone else to speak for us, and we do not know of anyone else who is put-porting to speak for us. But let me coma back again with great emphasisbecause I do think that it is central to this question of negotiation. And that is that the missing piecethe missing piece is any indication that Hanoi is pre-pared to stop Join# what it is doing against its neighbors. Now, in many of these postwar negotiations in the last 20 years, as you know, the negotiations have been frequently and most often pre-ceded by some indication that those negotiations might have some chance of success. Now, that is the missing piece herethat is the missing piece. The object is the safety and security of these smaIler countries of Southeast Asia. In that issue all of the smaller countries of the world have a vital stake. It is at the heart of'tbe very structure of intcr-natlonal life, of the international state system. And it is the missing element, the unreadiness of Hanoi to stop doing what it is doing that IS the problem in this thing called negotiation. Q. Mr. Secretary, did you give that message to Hanoi by way of the Chinese Communists in the Warsaw meeting the other day? A. We had a talkI think it was veaterday. That talk revealed nothing new in the known positions oi the two sides. That talk did not supply the missing piece that I am talking about. There was no indication in that talk that Hanoi is prepared to stop doing what they are doing. Q. Well, did you use that channel to get this word directly to them? A. Our policy, along the lines that I have summarized here, was made clear there; it is made clear repetitively with governments all over tho world, time and time again, and this was done yeSterday. Q. Mr. Secretary, there is speculation here that the United States is now in the process of expanding its military role in Viet-Nam in hopes that this might convince the Hanoi government to provide this missing link. A. I wouldn't speculate on that from that point of view. I would urge you to look at what I have said in. my opening statement. Look at all'of itlook at all of it taken together. That is the policythat is the policy. How you feel you must act at a particular time and under particular circumstances under that policy and within that policyfor example, within the joint resolution of the Congress depends upon circumstances from time to time. But the policy is to act to support the independence and safety of these countries of Southeast ASta. That is the policy. And I would urge you to give serious consideration to all of the eler ents that I have indicated m my opening statement. Q. Mr. Secretary. Secretary-General U Thant, in New York yesterday, in urging the beginning of some kind of informal discussions to restore peace in Viet-Nam. said, I am sure that the great American people, if they only know the true facts and the background to the developments in South Viet-Nam, will agree with me that further bloodshea is unnecessary. Now, are you hiding any true pacts from the American people? A. Well, I dont want to comment on that particular statement in any personal sense. I believe that there has been some clarification of that statement Since then. But, as I have said to you gentlemen before, I don't know of any situation anywhere in the world on which the American people have been better informed, in more detail, on a Current basis, both by oSa'als and by the intensive effort, of a vigorous and free press, that is the ca=e with respect to South Viet-Nam    Mr. Secretary, perhaps, sir, then you could clarify this point. There has teen a noticeable, considerable difference of emphasis in the statements of the general objectives of United States policy in these terms. There have- been times when the United States policy has been said to be to defend the freedom of the people of Viet-Nam. There have been other times when the policy of the United States has been said to be to resist the expansion of Chinese Communist aggression. Could you-clarify that? A. 1 think thoSe two mean exactly the same thing. The expansion of Communist .aggression involves the attempt to take over South Viet-Nam. I think that is looking at the Same coin from both its sides. Q. Mr. Secretary, the Secretary-General said he had made a proposal to the United States. The. White House said no such, proposal has been presented to the President. Do you. know of any such proposal? , A. Well, we, have talked over the past 2 years informally and on 1 a number of occasions with the Secretary-General, who carries a very heavy responsibility in his role at the United Nations, as well as with many governments in various parts of the world. Now, during that 2-year period, various suggestions have been discussed sometimes by us, sometimes by others. But the proposals that I know about thus far have been procedural in nature. The missing piece continues to be the absence of any indication that Hanoi is prepared to stop doing what it is doing against its neighbors. Now, these suggestions and procedural qucdions have been dismissed, many of them publicly. This question of calling a conference, under what circumstancesthese tire procedural matters, What we arc interested in, what is needed to restore peace to Southeast Asia, is substance, content, an indication that peace is possible in terms of the appetites arid the attitudes of the other side. Q. Mr. Secretary, would you evaluate the situation, the political situation in South- Viet-Nam, in the light of the recent changes of government and whether or not you fed that an effective government is noir possible there, and is that one of themissing pieces? A. Well, we have bean very deeply Concerned, as you know, for some time about the question of the essential unity and solidarity of tlte Government in Saigon. Confusion on that matteror the absence of unityramifies in a variety of directions and, of course, makes it that much more difficult for thorn and for us to act effectively to insure the independence and the safety of South Viet-Nam. And undoubtedly disunity and confusion in Saigon increases the expectw ion of the other side that, if they persist, they have a chance of -Jccess.  ... go wo attach the highest possible priority to unity and solidarity among the South Vietnamese lenders and its Government. I can express my belief, as well as my hope, that at least some of these problems of disunity have been resetved. The recent so-called coup that involvedwhat.-something like three battalions again, similar to the one of last September, did not interfere with the operation of the civilian government, or did not create a situation of bloodshed within the country. But we are moving with hops and expectation and in the closest working relationship with the present Government in that country. Q. Mr. Secretary, your statement seems to suggest that only Hanoi's aggression gives any body an major danger to what some have also described as the coincident civil war in South Viet-Nam. Did you mean to suggest, sir, that- if you obtain evidence that- Hanoi stops doing what it is doing, the United States aid and assistance to the South Vietnamese Government would no longer be necessary to handle the local problem? 6      A. Well, lets be a littIe careful about this word indigenous ele-nient. There are those who use that term, particularly in the Communist world, because the North Vietnamese are Vietnamese and the South Vietnamese are Vietnamese and they would like to hava everyone believe that that is what is meant by letting the Vietnamese settle their own problems. But an attack by North Viet-Nam on South Viet-Narir by military personnel and arms is aggression contrary to established agreements. Without the control of these operations from the North, without the manpower, the trained manpower sent from the North into the.South, without the supply of arms and other key items of equipment from North to South, the indigenous aspect of this problem, the genuinely indigenou aspect of this problem, would be quite a different matter. It was this external aspect of the matter which explains the presence of the American military personnel in that area, the rapid increase in American personnel since 19G1. It was the escalation of that infiltration. So I think we need to separate Very carefully that part which is local,.that part which is external; and the external part of it is the crucial aspect m terms of the pacification of the country and in terms of the establishment of peace in Southeast Asia. Q. You mean tten, also, sir, the withdrawal of such manpoxver as may have infiltrated, as Icing part of stopping, doing-- A. Well, that is what they are doing; that is what they must Stop. Q. Mr. Secretary, do you exvect more active and, perhaps collective support from other parties than Asians to the American effort in South Viet-Nam, end could you. describe whether they have given any formal pledges? A. Well, we have been discussing with other governments, as you know, for some time now, increased assistance to South Viet-Nam, political, through personnel, economic, in other ways. We have been encouraged in some cases to see that that increased assistance is forth-COtning. We know that there are other governments that are considering now whether they might not be abIe to do more than they have been doing, not just those in Asia. We would welcome additional support, and we think it is very important, both as an encouragement and practical support for South Viet-Nam and also as an indication to the other side of the international objection as to what the other side is trying to do here. Q. Mr. Secretary, in order to interpret your statement correctly, could you tell its whether or not you mean- to suggest that it would be a precondition of any negotiation or conference that there must be an actual cessation of this penetration, or merely an indication of that? A. No. I think that it is well for us and for everyone to concentrate on the meat of the matter. The meat of the matter is that Hanoi is sending these people and these arms into South Viet-Nam contrary to every agreement and contrary to international law. Now, if that problem is grappled with, then we can get into details. We can consider whether the meat involves a little salt and pepper and a dash of garlic, but here is the meat of the matter, and I. think we ought to keep our eyes on that. That is the central, all-important element in this situation.  Q. Mr. Secretary, what kind of legal lasts did the United States have to bomb the targets of North- Viet-Nam? A. Self-defense of South Viet-Nam and the commitments of the United States with respect to the security and the self-defense of South Viet-Nam.  . , . ' Q. Mr. Secretary, if we could turn from Viet-Nam briefly, I wonder if we could go to the Middle East. I wonder, sir, what was the reasoix for our approval of the shipments of tanks to Israel? And, secondly, noxc that the German shipments have ceased, what plans docs the United States hate to see that Israel gets the remaining part of the arms shipment?    A. On the first part of your question, we have been interested in some sort of reasonable balance in the armed forces in that area. As you know, Western Europe has been the primary supplier of m tns to Israel. We ourselves have tried not to be active in the Near East in the arms field, although we have taken some steps in that regard be-catl.se for some years we have been trying to find some v.av in which to put some ceihngs on this neighborhood arms race in the Near East7 .     We have been working with the governments concerned to find out whether it is possible that, this arms race might somehow be turned downward. The second part of your question I am not able to get intoabout the future. C. Jr, Secretary, in response to an earlier question you equated ChineseCommunist expansion ism-with the guerrilla war inSouth Viet-Nam. but I don't believe you mentioned Peiping or Communist China in your opening statement. I wonder vhethcr you could tell us what you believe the role of lied China and its guilt in this particular operation is? A. Well, I think in my earlier statement I intended to comment on---- Q. You emphasized Hanoi. A. I intended to comment in answer to an earlier question on Com-munist aggression and no specifically, necessarily Peiping or the Chinese Communist aggression at the same time. However, I think the role of Peiping here is pretty dear. They have gone to considerable lengths to make it public themselves. They have announced the doctrine of a militant world revolution, which they not only have adhered to in theory but have backed up in practice on more than one occasion. They have supported that doctrine with a harshness which has created very serious problems even within the Communist world, quite apart from problems with the free world. Now tve know that they have been giving encouragement, that they have been sending arms to North Viet-Nam, that many of these arm's that we capture in South Viet-Nam are of Chinese origin, Chinese manufacture, and they have thrown their military and undoubtedly their economic weight behind what Hanoi is doing, and I would suspect that they have a very strong influence, indeed in Hanoi's attitude in this present Situation. Q. Mr. Secretary, you mentioned Hanoi and Peipingwhat about . the shipment of Russian supplies to North Viet-Nam? A. We havent precise information on that, but I think in the. case of the Soviet Union, judging from their public as well as private statements over tho last 2 years or so, I think they have all along taken about the same view of South Viet-Nam as have other members of the Communist world. They have had a somewhat different view on Laos where they had a very specific and clear commitment on Laos, but I think they have been less active in this present situation than these other two capitals by a very considerable- Q. Mr. Secretary, could ice. return, sir. to what you restated several times as a, critical point? Could you clarify for us in a diplomatic sense what it is that the United States would regard as evidence that Hanoi is stopping doing what it is doing? Hou could this be converted into a diplomatic, negotiable situation? A. I don't think that it requires me. at this time to try to spell that out in detail. We would find out very shortly on the ground, as well as through any diplomatic channel, whether tliere has been any change in the position in that respect. But I don't think it is appropriate for me to talk-about complex sets of preconditions on their side or on our side or problems of that sort, because we still have this missing piece, which is the dominant element in the problem.  Q. Mr. Secretary, were we satisfied that all supplies and infiltration from the North had been stopped, would the United States be content to solve the indigenous aspects, the civil war aspects, by free elections under international supervision in South Viet-Nam? A. Well, lets get to the first step first, and then if we get to that step, then we will have the luxury of indulging in the consideration of the second step, s Q. What are our policies with regard to the indigenous aspects of a civil war? Could you enlighten vs on this? A. Well, J think that the indigenous aspects of it could be brought to a conclusion very quickly and that the South Vietnamese people could turn back to the problem of building their country and improv-inf their constitutional system, elevating the economic standards.of tlte country and get on with the modernization of the country which has been their purpose from the beginning    Q. But only by military force Mr. Secretary? A. I am not commenting on that. 1 think the pactnCatiou of Ine country would be easy if Um external aggression were stopped. Q jr Secretary, for years now we have been talking about ttie war in South Viet-Nam as a guerrilla war. A nd yet today twice you spoke- about the armed diack and aggression from one nation upon another. 1 wonder, sir, if this is. in substance, changing the context of our understanding of the war in Viet-Nam? A No I think all along we have put the finger on tins question of the infiltration of the personnel and of the arms from outride as the key to the problem, and if those are aggressive acts, that is aggression from the North, and that is the thing which is at the heart o. tile problem, 1 wouldn't characterize it as a different thing. Q. Mr. Secretary? o  did want to clear up two things here. You said you had looked into this matter, and 1 wondered, did you know there were unauthorized wiretaps and did you know there was untruthful testimony under oath? Those seem to be the pertinent pointsA. Well I am aware of the circumstances involving both those points, but I wont make a characterization of either one of them at this pointQ. Do you think it's all right? Ded you approve it? A. No, I am not making any Comment about what I did or did not approve of about either one of those pointsQ Mr. Secretary, in past press conferences I believe you have reiterated the theme that the warand so has Secretary of Defense itobert S. McNamarathat the war has to be- won in the South. Why now is all this talk about Hanoi and infiltration from the North.-This is a relatively new theme, at least as far as the emphasis ts concerned. Arc you still of the mind that the war has to be won on the ground in the South? , j A. Well, that part of it, of course, 13 extremely important and A crucial to the ent ire effort. But again kt me go back to my opening statement, taken altogether. Bc ;ion,thesearerre acts from the North have beenas we have made clear recently have been increased both with respect to manpower and with respect to arms. The problem has increased in size and scale. And the necessary steps, therefore, change o 0 e Q. Mr. Secretary? A. Yes, sir? Q. 1F hen we were involved in the Korean war, Chiang Kai-sheKs offer of troops to participate was refected. Now, as I understand it, South Koreans are being introduced into Viet-Nam. Can you tell us wherein the situations differ? A. Well, the South Korean personnel that are goin into South Viet-Nam are not going there for combat purposes. They will be primarily engaged, I understand, on engineering tasks here and there. They will have with them certain local guards in connection with those particular tasks. They were requested by the South Vietnamese Government. They have a limited mission." I think that explains that particular pouit. T he other question 15 years ago had many more complications in it. Q. Are the South Koreans able to defend themselves if attacked? A. J he South Koreans and the United States are able to defend South Korea if attacked, yes.Q. Mr. Secretary, without commenting on specific future opcra-dions, you did imply in one of your earlier answers that the concept of self-defense and Ur.iref States security commitments would, in your view, give us the right to continue attacks. A. 1 think the question vaa the legal basis for ths action that had been taken in that regard. Q. II ell, that implied the broad concept of self-defense would permit----- A, Thats correct. Q------would permit further attacks without necessarily A. I was commenting on the legal basis, yes. 9 .     C. Under that concept, Mr. Secretary, has the United States, by allowing American combat flights in South Viet-Nam, modified its previous position on the role of U.S. forces in South Viet-Nam? A. Well, again, tho policy remains the same. Look at tho congressional resolution passed by a margin of 502 to 2. Now, the use of a particular weapon may change from time to time, or a typ f aircraft, but the poIicy is the same. When the Circumstances or Changed circumdanceS require changed actions, those aCtions will be taken. But that does not mean an underlying change of policy. I have tried to put together in my opening statement the elementary and basic policy within which we are operating. Q. Mr. Secretary, to go back to the negotiations, is it a fair summary of what you have been saying today that the United States is not prepared for any kind of negotiation on the war in South Viet-Nam with the governments of Hanoi and Peiping unless and until what you call this missing piece is provided? N. Well, I would think that that would-be the essential point in discovering whether what is broadly called tno political process whether its diplomatiC contacts or whateverCan help bring this question to a peaceful solution. I think that is crucial to it. There is no political simmick by which you can bar the other side from continuing aggie-sion if they are determined to do so. That has to be met cm the ground, factually, directly. There is no political v.izardy which will change that until that will is changed, until the decision is changed on the other side. ' . Q. A related question, Mr. Secretary----- Q. Mr. Secretory, could you give us your thinking on the present reception being accorded to Mr. Ulbricht of East Germany by Egypt? A. Well, we consider the Federal, Republic of Germany the. spokes-mnn for the German people on international affairs. We have not looked villi favor upon any treatment of East Germany or its officials that, would st-cm to undergird or underpin the division of the German people or enhance the posdion of the regime in Fast. Germany. Q. Mr. Secretary. Laos is also a part of this aggression from North Viet-Nam. The policy statements that you hove been making today apply equally to Laos, do they, or just for 1 'ict-Nam? A. Yes. For brevity's sake I did not include Laos in detail, but. the the same situation obtains there. In the case of Laos, we have an agreement as recent as 19G2. I don't know of any single day since the signing of those agreements in which North Viet-Nam hits been, in compliance with them. Now, compliance with those agreements would make, a big contribution to the peace of Southeast Asia. That is what they were for. Their entire purpose, was to decide that everyone would leave the Laotians alone and let them run their own affairs. That is what it was all about. Q. Mr. Secretary, it seems that the congressional opinion that has been expressed over the last couple of weeks has not focused, so much on goals of policy, which you have outlined, but the ability of the United States to realize them in Southeast Asia. Gan you say why you think the new level of action which the U.S. has moved up to in Southeast Asia will realize these- goals any more than the policy of simply fighting the war out in the South that we were- following before? . A. "Well, think I would go back to the President's statement on February Uth and to the underlying policy of the congressional resolution itself. What is requircd'is required. The commitment there is very clear with respect to this aggression and our commitment to the security of these count rks of Southeast Asia. No, J dont think one could look into the future and get a specific answer to your question as t$ how they will eventually develop. The other side is very much involved in writing that scenario. I think the policy and the determination and the attitude are dear. 10      C. JA'. docottny, if the British and the Russian Governments as cuochairm.cn of the Geneva conference, decided to convene it, in the absence of the missing piece, would the United States be prepared to attend this conference? A. Well, 1 think they would be in consultation with the members of the. conference before they convened it. Q. Mr. Secretary, it is implied on the subject of negotiations that u-hat you're saying U that the minimum on our side would be a status quo ante. That is, at the beginning of the guerrilla war, that South Yict-Xam would remain with its territorial integrity and independence. A. Well, the hbart of the. problem is an assault upon the safely and (he territorial integrity ami independence of South Viet-Nam. If that is relieved and removed; then things can begin to move. That is the heart of the problem. That is why we have forces out there. They could come homo tomorrow if that problem had not been Created by aggression. They never would have Even there in the first place. That is the central heavl, the essence of the situation, and that is the problem that has to be dealt with. Q. Thank you, sir. s Departlent of State SUcfir.?illr. 15, i9C5, pp. 362-371. 11 .     PATTERN FOR PEACE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA Address by President Johnson, Johns Hopkins University, April 17, 19651 Y Last week 17 nations sent their views to some two dozen countries having an interest in Southeast Asia. We are joining those 17 court-tries and silting our American policy tonight, which we believe will contribute toward peace in this area of the world. I have come here to review once again with my own people the views of the American Government. Tonight Americans and Asians are dying for a world where each people may chorue its o-.vn path to change. This is the principle- for which our ancestors fought in the valleys of Pennsylvania. It is a principle for which our sons fight tonight in the jungles of Viet-Nam. Viet-Nam is far away from this quiet campus. We have no territory there, nor do we seek any. The war is dutv and brutal and difficult. And some 400 young men, born into an America that is bursting with opportunity and promise, have ended their lives on Viet-Nanfs steammg soil.   Why must we take this painful road? Why must this nation hazard its ease, its interest, and its power for the sake of a people so faraway? . We fight because we must fight if we are to live in a world where every country can shape its own destiny, and only in such a world will our own freedom be finally secure. This kind of world trill never be built by bombs or bullets. Yet the. infirmities of man are such that force must often precede reason and the waste of war. Ilie works of peace. We wish that this were not so. But we must deal with the- world as it is, if it is ever to be. as we wish. The world aS it is in Asia is not a serene or peaceful place. The. first reality is that North Viet-Nam has attacked the independent. nation of South Viet-Nam. Its object is total conquest. Of course, some of the people of South Viet-Nam are participating in attack on their own government. But trained men and supplies, orders and arms, flow in a constant stream from North to South. This support is the heartbeat of the war. -And it is a war of unparalleled brutality. Simple fanners anrthe targctS of assassination and kidnaping. Women and children are strangled in the night because their men are loyal to their government. And nelplesS villages are ravaged by sneak attacks. Large-SCale raids are conducted on towns, and terror strikes in the heart of cities. The confused nature of this conflict cannot mask the. fact that it. is the new face of an old enemy. Over this warand all Asiais another reality the deepening shadow of Communist China. The rulers in Hanoi are urged on by Peiping. This is a regime which has destroyed freedom in Tibet, which has attacked India, and has been condemned by the United Nations for aggression in Korea. It is a nation which is helping the forces of violence in almost every continent. The contest in Viet-Nam is part of a wider pattern of aggressive purposes. Why are these realities our concern? Why are we in South VietNam?  We are there because we have a promise to keep. Since 1954 every American President Las one-red support to the people of South VietNam. We have help t to build, and we have helped to defend. Thus, over many years, we have made a national pledge to help South. VietNam defend its independence. And I intend to keep tuct promise. To dishonor that pledge, to abandon this small and brave nation to its enemies, and to the terror that must follow, would be an un-forgivabls wrong. lVe are also there to Strengthen world order. Around the globe, from Berlin to Thailand, are people whose vell-being rests in part on the belief that they can count on us if they are attacked. To leave Viet-Nam to its fate vroul 1 shalm the confidence of all these people in the value of an American commitr. ent and in rhe vaIue of Ainencas word. The result would be increns-d unrest and instability, and even wider war. 12      tt c arc also tliore because there are great stakes in the balance. Let no one think for a moment that retreat from Viet-Nam would bring an end to conflict. The battle would bc renewed in one country and then another. The central lesson of our time is that the appetite of aggression is never satisfied. To withdraw from one battlefield means only to prepare for the next. We must Stay in Southeast.  Asiaas we did in Europein the words of the Bible "Hitherto shalt thou conic, but no further." There are those who say that, all our effort there will be futile that Chinas power is such that it is bound to dominate all Southeast  Asia. But there is no end to that argument until all of the nations of Asia are swallowed up. There are those who wonder why we have a responsibility there. Well, we have it there for the same reason that we have a responsibility for the defense of Europe. World War II was fought in both Europe and Asia, and when it ended we found ourselves with continued responsibility for the defense of freedom.  Our objective is the independence of South Viet-Nam and its freedom from attack. We want nothing for ourselvesonly that the people of South Viet-Nam be allowed to guide their own country in their own way. We will do everything necessary to reach that objective, and we will do only what is absolutely necessary. In recent months attacks on South Viet-Nam were stepped up. Thus, it became necessary for us to increase our response and to make attacks by air. This is not a change of purpose. It is a change in what we' believe that purpose requires. We do this in order to slow down aggression. We do this to increase the confidence of the brave people of South Viet-Nam who have bravely borne this brutal battle for so many years with so many casualties- . And we do this to convince the leaders of North Viet-Namand all who seek to share their conquestof a simple faCt We will not be defeatedWe will not grow tired. Wo will not withdraw, either openly or under the cloak of a meaningless agreement. We know that air attacks alone will not accomplish all of these purposes. But it is our best and prayerful judgment that they are a necessary pnt of the surest road to Peace. Wo hope that peace will come swiftly. But that is in the hands of others besides ourselves. And we must be prepared for a long continued conflict. It will require patience as well as braverythe will to endure as well as the will to resist. I wish it were possible to convince others with words of what we now End it necessary to Say with guns and plar.es armed hostility is futileour resources are equal to any challengebecause v.e fightfor values and we fight for principle, rather than territory or colonies, our patience and our determination are unending. Once this is clear, then it should also be clear that the only path for reasonable men is the path of peaceful settlement. Such peace demands an independent South Viet-Namsecurely guaranteed and able to shape its own relationships to all othersfree from outside interferencetied to no alliancea military base for no other country. These are the essentials of any final settlement. We will never be second in the search for such a peacefut settlement in Viet-Nam. , . , . There may be many ways to this kind of peace in disCussion or negotiation with the governments concerned in large groups or in small ores in the re-amnnation of old agreements or their strengthening with new ones. We have stated this position over and over again 50 times and more to friend and foe alike. .And we remain ready with this purpose for unconditional discussions.  And until that bright and neCas&uv day of peace we will try to keep conflict from spreading. We have no desire to see thousands die in battleAsians or Americans. We have no desire .to devastate that which the people of North Viet-Nam have built with toil and sacrifice. We will use our power with restraint and with all the wisdom that we can command. But we will use it 13 '      This war, Iike most wars, is filled with terrible irony. For what do the people of North Viet-Nam want ? They want what their neighbors also desirefood for their hunger, health for their bodies, a chance to leant, progress for their country, and an end to the bondage of material misery. And they would find all these things far more readily in peaceful association with others than in the endless course of battle These countries of Southeast Asia are homes for millions of im-poverished people. Each day these people rise, at dawn and struggle through until the night to wrest existence from the- soil. They"are often wracked by diseases, plagued by hunger, and death comes at the 1 early age of 40. Stability and peace d.o not come easilv in sttcl a land. Neither independence nor human dignity will ever be won, though, by arms alone. It also requires the works of peace. The American people have helped generously in times past in these works, and now there must be a much more massive effort to improve the life of man in that conflict-torn Corner of our world. The first step is for the countries of Southeast Asia to associate themselves in a greatly expanded cooperative effort for development. We would hope that. North Viet-Nam would take its place in Ilie com-mon effort j'ust as soon as peaceful cooperation is possible. The United Nations is already actively engaged in development in this area, and as far back in 19G1 I conferred with our authorities in Viet-Nam in connection with their work there. And I would hope tonight that the SeCrctary-General of the United Nations could use the prestige of hiS great ofiiee and his deei> knowledge of Asia to initiate, as soon as possible, with the countries of that area, a plan for cooperation in increased development. For our part I will ask the Congress to join in a billion-dblbr American investment in this effort as soon as it is underway. And I would hope that all other industrialized countries, including the Soviet Union, will joint in this effort to replace despair with hope and terror with progress. The task is nothing less than to enrich the hopes and existencC of more than a hundred million people. And there is much to be done. The vast Mekong River can provide food and water and power on a scale to dwarf even our own T VA. The wonders of modem medicine Can be spread through villages where thousands die every year from lack of care. Schools can be. established to train people in the skills needed to numnga the process of development. And these objectives, and more, are within the reach of a cooperative and determined effort. I also intend to expand and speed up a program to make available our farm surpluses to r.ssist in feeding and clothing the needy in Asia. We should not allow people to go hungry and wear rags while our own warehouses overflow with an abundance of wheat and com and rice and cotton. So I will very shortly name a special team of outstanding patnotic, and distingtuSlied Americans to inaugurate our participation in these programs This team will be headed by tIr. Eugene Black, the very ableTormer President of the World Bank. This will be a disorderly planet for a long time. In Asia, and elsewhere; the forces of the modern world are shaking old ways and uprooting ancient civilizations. There will be turbulence and strug-<r!e and even violence. Great social changeas we see in our own Countrydoes not al way come without conflict. We must also expect that nations will on occasion be in dispute with us. It may be because we are rich, or powerful, or because we have made some mistakes, or because they honestly fear our intentions. However, no nation need ever fear that we desire their land, or to impose our will, or to dictate their ins? itutions. But we will always opROSe the effort of one nation to conquer an- other nation. We will dp this because our own security is at st ake. But there is more to it than that. For our generation has a dream. It is a very old dream. But we have the power, and now we have the Opportunity tom.'ke that dreamcome true.. For centuries nations have struggled among each other. But vre dream of a world where disputes are Settled by law and reason. And we will try to make it so. 14     By NWD Date 201 I For most of history men have hated and killed one another in battle. But we dream of an end to war. And we will try to make it so.  . For all existence most men have lived in poverty, threatened by hunger. But we dream of a world where all are fed and charged with hope. And we will help to make it so. The ordinary men and women ot North Viet-Nam and South VietNam, of China -and India, of Russia and America, are brave people. They are filled with the same proponions of hate and fear, of love and hope. Most of them want the same things for themselves and theirfamilies. Most of them do not want their sons to ever die in battle, or to see their homes, or the homes of others, destroyed. Well, this can be their world yet. Man now has the knowledge always before deniedto make this planet Serve the real needs of the people who live on it. I know this will not be easy. I know how dificult it is for reason to guide passion, and love to master hate. The complexities of this world do not bow easily topure and consistent answers. But the simple truths are there just the. same. We must all try to follow them as best we can. We often say how impressive power is. But I do not find it impressive at all. The guns and the bombs, the rockets and the warships, are all symbols of human failure. They are necessary symbols. They protect what we cherish. But they are witness to human folly. A dam built across a great river is impressive. In the countryside where I was born, and where I live, I have seen the night iluminated, and the kitchen warmed, and the home heated, where once the cheerless night and the ceaseless cold held sway. And all this happened because electricity came to our area, along the humming wires of the REA. Electrification of the countryside yes. that, too, is impressive. A rich harvest in a hungry land is impressive. The sight of healthy children in a classroom is impressive. Thesenot mighty armsare the achievements which the American nation believes to be impressive. And if we are steadfast, the time may come when all other nations will also find itso. Every ni"ht before I turn out the lights to sleep I ask myself this question Have I done everything that I can do to unite this country ? Have I done everything I can to help unite the world, to try to bring peace and hope to all the peoples of the world ? Have I clone enough ? Ask yourselves that question in your homesand in this hall tonight. Have we, each of us, all done all we can do? Have we done enough ? We may well be living in the time foretold many years ago when it was said "I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before yon life and death, blessing and cursing there- fore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live." This generation of the world must choose destroy or build, kill, or aid, hate or understand. We can do all these things on a scale that has never been dreamed of before. Well, we will choose life. And so doing, we will prevail over the enemies within mnn, and over the natural enemies of all mankind. 15 Department of State BuHttin, ,,, 25. 1965, pp. 630-510    EXTRACT OF SPEECH BY SOUTH VIETNAMESE FOREIGN MINISTER TRAN VAN DO ON THE OCCASION OF THE DAY FOR INTERNATIONAL AID, June 22, 1965 For many years, South Vietnam has been plunged into a war imposed on it by the Communists. It has been able to preserve the integrity of its territory and freedom only because of the courage of its sons and the friendly countries of the free world, which have not spared either their friendship or their generous assistance. To the representatives of those countries present at this ceremony, I express, in the name of the Republic and people of South Vietnam, our profound gratitude, which I ask them to convey to their Government. It is also my duty to tell them what we are doing with their assistance. Some is used to relieve the misery and suffering of our people as a result of the war, to robuild on our ruins, and to rcconstruct our nation; some to help us defend ourselves against the Communist aggression. 1 say "defend ourselves advisedly, for our primary objective continues to be the search for peace and not the spread or prolongation of the war. We do, certainly, want peace, but not peace at any price. If it is to be a just end enduring peace, the following conditions must be met 1. Since the war now in progress in Vietnam was provoked by Communist aggression and subversion, it is essential, first of all, that these subversive and military activities undertaken, directed, and supported from abroad against the independence and freedom of the people of South Vietnam cease, and that the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of the two zones, a principle that was laid down in the 1954 Geneva agreement and in international law, be respected. Consequently, the Communist regime of Hanoi must dissolve all these front organizations and agencies it has created in South Vietnam under the title the "Front for the Liberation of the South, Liberation Radio Station, and Peoples Revolutionary Party, and, it must remove from South Vietnam the troops and the political and military leaders it has sent there illegally. 2. The internal affairs of the South Vietnamese people must be left to the discretion of those people in conformity with democratic principles end without any foreign interference from whatever source. That will be feasible, obviously, only when the aggression by the Communist regime of Hanoi tmd its campaign of intimidation to which the people of South Vietnam have been subjected have been terminated. 3. As soon as aggression has ceased, the Government of the Republic of Vietnam and the nations tlmt come to its aid will be able to suspend the military measures in the territory of South Vietnam and beyond its boundaries that are now necessary to defend that territory against Communist aggression. Moreover, the Government of the Republic of Vietnam is prepared to ask friendly nations then to remove their military forces from South Vietnam. It reserves the right, however, to take whatever measures are necessary to see that law and order are respected throughout the territory of South Vietnam and to inaure the safety of the South Vietnamese people, aS well as the right to appeal again for foreign assistance in the case of further aggresston or threat or aggression. 4. Lastly, the independence end freedom ofthe peopIe of South Vietnam mu5t be effectively guaranteed. If the Communist regime tn Hanoi stncerelj wants pe..ce, if it P the interests of the nation above those of an ideology or a party, n it wants the Vietnamese people and tne other peoples o southeast Asia to live in peace instead of war, prosperity instead of poverty, freedom in<tp- d of slaverv, it has or.lv to put an end to aggression.  Th'iS is the only path that'we believe can lead to peace n the South Vietnamese people are to be able to enjoy the lull bene.l.s O tne aid that the friendly nations have so generously lavished upon it. 16      77.-71 TEXT OF A STATEMENT OxN VIETNAM BY PRESIDENT JOHNSON AT HIS PRESS CONFERENCE OF JULY 28,1935 Wb "Will Stand ix Vietnam My follow Americans, not long ago 1 received a letter from a vronu.n in the Midwest. She wrote, Desk Mr. IT.EstD st In my humbte v. r.y I am writing to you about the crisis iu Vietnam. 1 have r. son who is now in Vmtuam. My hm-band Serve! in Wosll war II. Our country was at war, but now, this time, it is just something that I dont understand. V>'hy? . Well, 1 have tried to answer tliet question dozens of times and more in pmctictiIly every State in this Union. I have discussed it fully in Baltimore in April, in Washington in May, in San Franchco in June. Let me again, now, tlisCitsS it here in the east room of the White House. Why must young AmoricanS, born into a land exultant with hope and with golden promise, toil and Stiffer and somctimeS die in such a remote and distant place? TUB LESSON OF HISTORY The nnswer, like the war itself, is not an easy one, but it ochocs dearly from the painful lessons of half a century. Three times in my lifetime, in two World Wars and in Korea, Americans have gone to far lands to fight for freedom. lVe have learned at a terrible and brutal cost that retreat does not bring safety and weakness docs not bring pettocIt is this lesson that has brought us to Vietnam. This is a different kind of war. There are no marching armies or solemn deelanuions. Some citizens of South Vietnam, at times with understandable griev-p.nCes, have joined in the attack on their own government. But wcmuSt not let this mask the central fact that, this is really war. It is guided by North Vietnam, end it is spurred by Communist China. Jts goal is to conquer the South, to defeat American power, and to extend the Asiatic dominion of communism. There are great stakes in thc balance. Most of the.non-Communist nations of Asia cannot, by themSclvoS . and alone, resist growing might and the grasping ambition of Asian communism.  Our power, therefore, is a very vital shield. If we arc driven from the field in Vietnam, then no nation can ever again have the same Confidence in American promise or in American protection. In each land the forces of indcpendonce would be considerabIy weakened and an ASia'so threatened by Communist domination would certainly imperil the security of thc United States itself. We did not chooS? to be thc guardians at the gate, but there is no one else. Nor would surrcnder in Vietnam bring peace, because we learned from Hitler al Munich that success only feeds the appetite of aggression. The battle would be renewed in one country and then another Country, bringing with it perhapl even larger and cruder conflict, aS we have learned from the lessons of historyMoreover, we are in Vietnam to fulfill onc of thc most Sojetnn pledges of thc American Nation. Three PresidentsPresident Eisenhower, President Kennedy, and your present Presidentover 11 years have committed themselves and have promised to help defend this small and valiant nation. Strcr. thened bv that promise, the people of South Vietnam have founltt Tor many long years. Thousands of them have died. Thou-sanhs more have been crippled and. scarred by war. We just cannot now dishonor our word, or abandon our Commitment, or leave those who believed us and who tfUSted us to the terror and repression and . murder that would follow.   .  This, then, my fellow Americans, is why we are in Vietnam. 1 Department ot State Publication 7937, Relwvtd August 1955.      .- .. INCREASE IN U.S. F0KCES What are our goals in that war-stained land? First, wc intend to convince the Communists that we cannot be defeated by force of arms or by superior power. They are not easily convinced. In recent months they have greatly ihcreescd their fighting forces Cr.d their attacks and the numbcr of incidents. I have asked the commanding generd, General Vniliwn C.l Wclttnorehmd, vhat more he needs to meet this mounting aggression. Me hes told me. lYe will meet his needs. 1 have today ordcre ! to Vietnam the Air Mobile Division and certain other forces which will raise our fIghtim; strength from 75,000 to 125,000 men almost immediately. Additional forces will bc needed inter, and they will be sent as requested. This will make it necessary to increase our active fghling forces by raising the monthly draft call from 17,000 over a period of time to 35,000 per month, and for us to step up our Campaign for voluntary enlistments. After this past week of deliberations, I have concluded that it is not essential to order Reserve units into service now. Jf that necessity , should later be indicated, I will give the matter most careful considcra-tion and 1 will give thc country clue and adequate notice before taking such action, but only after full preparations. Wc have also discussed with the Government of South Vietnam lately tho steps thnt we will take to substantially increase their own effort, both on the battlefield and toward reform and progress in the villages. Ambassador Lodge is now formulating a now program to bo tested upon his return to that area. CONG RESsiONZI. RF.VIEW J have directed Secretary Rusk and SeCretary McNamara to be available immediately to thc Congress to review with these com-mil tees, the appropriate congressional committees, what we plan to to in these areas. 1 have asked them to be able to answer the questions of any Member of Congress. Secretary McNamara, in addition, will ask the Senate Appropriations Committee to add a limited amount to present legislation to help meet part of this new cost until a supplemental measure is ready, and hearings can be held when the Congress assembles in January.  . In thc meantime, we will use thc authority contained in thc present i defense appropriations bill under Consideration, to transfer funds in , addition to the additional money that we will ask. ) These steps, like our actions in thc past, are Carefully measured to do what must be done to bring an end to aggression and a peaceful settlement. We do not want an expanding struggle with Consequences that no one Can perceive, nor will we bluster or bully or flaunt our power, but we will not surrender and we will not retreat, for behind our American pledge lies the determination and resources, I believe, of all of the I American Nation. u.s. welcomes unconditional discussions Second, once thc Communists know, as wc know, that a violent solution 1s impoasible, then a peaceful solution iS inevitable.  We are ready now, as we have always been, to move from the battlefield to the conference table. I have stated publiely and, many times, again and again, AmericaS willingnesS to begin unconditional disCttssionS with any government at any place at any time. Fifteen efforts have been it rule to start these discussions with the help of 40 nations throughout thc world, but there has been no answer. But wc are going to continue to persist, if persist we must, until death and desolation have led to tnc some conference table where otherS could now join us at a much smaller cost. 18       havo Spoken many times of our objectives in Vietnam. So has the Government of South Vietnam. Hanoi has set forth its own prop-xmls. We are ready to discuss their proposals and our proposals and any proposals of any Government whose people may be aftected, for we fear the meeting room no more than we fear the battlefield. In this pursuit we welcome and we ask for the concern and the assistance of any nation and all nations. Ji thc United Nations and its officials cr any one of its 111 members can by deed or word, private initiative or public action, bring us nearer an honorable peace, then they will have thc support and the gratitude of thc United States of America. 1 1 have directed Ambassador Goldberg to  to New York today and to present immediately to Secretary General U Thant a letter from me requesting that all of the rosourceS, energy, and immense prestige of the United Nations be employed to find ways to halt aggression and to bring peace in VietnamPURPOSE or u.s. action I made a Similar request at San FrancisCo a few weeks ago, becaitSC we do not Seek the destruction of any government, nor do wo covet a foot of any territory, but we insist and we will always insist that the people of South Vietnam shall have the right of choice, the.right to shape their own destiny in free elections in thc south, or throughout all Vietnam under international Supervision, and they shall not have any government imposed upon them by force and terror so long as we can prevent it. ' This was the purpose of the 1951 agrecmentS which the Conunu-nists havo now cruelly shattered. If the machinery of those agreements was tragicalIy weak, its purposes Still guide our action. As battle rages, we will continue as best we can to help the good people of South Vietnam enrich the condition of their life, to feed the hungry, and to tend the sick, and teach thc young, and shelter the homeless, and help the fanner to increase crops, and the worker to find a job. It is an ancient but still terrible irony that while many leaders of men Croate division in pursuit of grand ambitions, thc children of man arc really united in the simple, elusive desire for a life of fruitful and rewarding'toil. As J said at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, I hope that one day we cau help all the people of Asia toward that desire. Eugene Black haS ' made great progress since my appearance in Baltimore in that direction not as the price of peace, for we arc ready always to bear a more painful Cost, but rather as a part of our obligation- of justice toward our fellow man. ... A PERSONAL NOTE Let mo also add now a personal note. I do not find it easy to send thc flower of our youth, our finest young men, into battle. I have spoken to you today of the divisions and thc forces and thc battalions and the units. But I know them all, every one. J have seen them in & thousand Streets, of a himrlrcd towns, in every State in this Unionworking end laughing and building, and filled with hope and life. I think that I know, too, how their mothers weep and how their families sorrow. This is the most agonizing and the most painful duty of your  PreSident.  19      LETTER FROM PRESIDENT JOHNSON TO U THANT, SECRETARY GENERAL OF THE U.N1TED NATION'S, JULY 23, 1965 1 His Excellency U Thaxt, Secretary General of the United Nations, United Nations, N. Y. ' Dear Mr. Secretary General I want you to know from me directly of the very great personal confidence which I place in Ambassador Goldberg. His appointment as permanent representative of the United States to the United Nationsand his acceptance of this responsibility in the circumstancesis, I hope, strong evidence that this Government places the very highest importance on the work of the United Nations and will continue to give it our utmost support. I have instructed Ambassador Goldberg'especially to maintain close contact with you on the situation in Vietnam. Your efforts in the past to find some way to remove that dispute from the battlefield to the negotiating table are much appreciated and highly valued by my Government. I trust they will be continued. Meanwhile, as I stated pnlilicIy last April, the Government of the United States is prepared to enter into negotiations for peaceful settlement without conditions. That remains our policy. And as I stated in San FTancisco last month, we hope that the mem-bers of the United Nations, individually and coIIectively, will use thelr influence to bring to the negotiating table all governments involved in an attempt to halt aIl aggression and evolve a peaceful Solution. I continue to hope that the United Nations can, in fact, be effective in this regard. I Lope that you will communicate to us, through Ambassador Goldberg, any helpful suggestions that may occur to you that can strengthen our common search for the road to peace in southeast Asia. Sincerely, LyndoN B. Johnson. LETTER FROM AMBASSADOR ARTHUR J. GOLDBERG TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL, JULY 30, 1365 1 Dear Mr. President The President of the United States tm-nounccd on July 2S, 19G5, certain steps being taken by my Government to lend further assistance to the Republic of Vietnam in resisting armed aggression. At the same time the President re&fnrmed to the Secretary General of the United Nations the willuyncss of the United States to enter into negotiations for peaceful settlement without conditions, and again invited all members of the United Nations, individually and coilec-tively. to use their influence to bring about dhcustms in a negotiating forum. On July 29 the Secretary General inunediateIy sent a most welcome and appreciated reply, stating his determination to pursue his eliorts to remove the dispute over Vietnam from the battlefield to the negotiating table. The Security Council, which has a legitimate biterest in the pence of southsmt Asia, has been kept informed of the policy oftnyGovern-ment with respect to the cancerous course ol events in that part of the world. For example, my late predecessor, Arab; snulor Adki E. Stevenson, told the Council more than a year ago on May 21 1964 ,  the I'.site S ver h- ? o, r.?p?t r.a, national mil -.ry obje.'tiv.? ant-ehere in southeast Asia. U.S. policy for southeast Asia is very sbcple. It is the restora-ton of peace so that the peopks of that area cr.a go about their own mtlpcadent business in v.hncvcr astocbUo  they may freely chQoso for themselves without interference from the outride. Members of the Council Aso are aware of the prolonged and repeated efforts of the U.S. Government to open a path to peaceful solution of the dispute? of southeast Asia,beginning with our acceptance of the terms of the Geneva Accords of 1951These HIorts have included 20      Various approaches to Hanoi, Peiping, and Moscow. Support of peaceful overtures by the United Kingdom, Canada, and the British Common wealth of Nations. Favorable reactions to proposals made by 17 nonalined nations, and later by the Government of India. Approval of efforts by the Secretary General of the United Nations to initiate peace talks. Endorsement of n larger role for the United Nations in southeast Asia, including a V.N. mission of observers along the frontier between Vietnam and Cambodia, a U.N. mission to investigate alleged suppression of minority rights in Vietnam, and a U.N'-invitation to Hanoi to participate in Security Council discusSions of the incident in the Gulf of Tonkin. Major participation, directly and through the United Nations, in economic and social development projects in southeast Asin. A direct appeal by the President of the United States to the members of the United Nations to uSe their influence in bringing all parties to the peace table. Repeated assertions on the highest- authority that the United States is prepared to engage in negotiations or disCUSsionS of any Character with no prior conditions whatever. On at least 15 occasions in the past four and a half years, the United States has initiated or supported efforts to resolve the issues in southeast Asia by peaceful negotiations. I am sure that the other members of the Security Council share the deep regrets of my Government in the (act that none of these initiatives has met with any favorable response whatever. It is especially unfortunate that .he regime in Hanoi, which, along with'the Republic of Vietnam, is most directly involved in the conflict, has denied the competence of the United' Nations to concern itself with this dispute in any manner and has even refused to participate in the discussions in the Council. Nonetheless, our commitments under the Charter of the United Nations require us to persist in the search for a negotiated end to the cruel and futile violence that ravages the Republic of Vietnam. This responsibilityto persist in the search for peaceweighs especially upon the members of the Security Council, the primary organ of the United Nations for peace and security affairs. The purpose of this communication therefore is to reemphasize to the members of the Council the following points First, that the United States will continue to provide, in whatever measure and for whatever period is necessary, assistance to the people of the Republic of Vietnam in defending their independence, their sovereignty, and their right to choose their own government and make their ow n decisions. Second, the United States will continue to assist in the economiC and social advancement of southeast Asia, under the leadership of Asian countries and the United Nations, and will continue to explore all additional possibilities, especially in connection with the great projects taking shape in the Lower Mekong Basin. Third, the United States will continue to explore, indepandently and in conjunction with others, all possible routes to an honorable and durable peace in southeast Asia. Fourth, the United States stands ready, as it has in the past, to col-Iaborate unconditionally with member.' of the Security Council in the Search for an acceptable formula, to restore peace and security to that area of the world. It is the hope of my Government that the members of the Security Council will somehow find the means to respond effectively to the challenge rawed by the present state of afTairs in southeast Asia. I respectfully reque-t tm t thh Communication be cireuIated to the members of the United Nations as a Security Council document. Accept, Excellency, the assurance of my highest consideration. Arthur J. Goldberg. V.S. mb-ion to the Vn;;.t Nttler., ;mss reletM 4110, djicd July 30,1915. 21      CORRESPONDENCE WITH FOREIGN MINISTER FAXFAXI OF ITALY, NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1065 1 FoKEIGx MINISTER FaNFAXIs LETTER TO PRESIDENT JOHNSON, November 20, 1965 Hon. Lyxpox B. Johxsox, President of the United States. Mr. PaEsmENT In the interview which you graciously aceordcd me at the end of May you repeated anew your firm intention to seek assiduously a negotiated solution for the conflict in Vietnam. In the hope of being able to assist in the realization of this noble purpose, I bring to your attention the following ' On Thursday, November 11, in Hanoi, Iio Chi Minh, and the President of the Council, Van Dong, expressed to two persons (known to me) the strong desire to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Vietnam and, in summary, statedaCCourding to what they wrote methat in order for the peace negotiations to come about, there will be ncccssary (a) a cease-fire (by air, by Sea, by land) in the entire territory of vietuam (north and SOuth); th .- cessationthat is, of all beligercnt operations (including therefore aLo the cessation of debarkation of further American troops); (i) a declaration according to which the Geneva agreements of 1951 will be taken as the bans for the negotiationsa declaration made up of the four points formulated by Hanoi, points that are in reality the explanation of the Geneva text and which, thcre-fore, can be reduced to a single point  application, in other words, of the Geneva accord. The text of the communication which J have received adds that "the government in Hanoi is prepared to initiate negotiations without first requiring actual withdrawal of the American troops. To the same interlocutors Ho Chi Minh Said "I am prepared to go anywhere; to meet anyone." These are the esSential points that one of the two interlocutors of Ho Chi Minh and Van Dong sent me in writing last night and which, in this letter of mineconfided to Mr. A. Goldberg, the U.S. representative to the U.N., so, that he can deliver it promptly and ConfidentiallyI bring word for word to your attention. You surely have other dements by which to judge the importance of the above. As President of the 20lh Assembly, as a high official of Italy, as a sincere friend of the United States and of yourself, I hope that this Contribution to the sought-fof peaceful Solution, always more necessary and more urgent, may be a useful one. And I am at your disposition for any step that you consider opportune in the matter. With sincere pleasure at your recovery find with best wishes for tout high mission, I send my respectful greetings. Yours, Amixtobu Faxfaxi. Secretary Rusks Reely to Foheigx MinIster Faxfaxi, December 4, 1965 His Excellency Amixtoke Fanfam, Foreign Minister of Italy. Deaf, Mr. Faxfaxi My Government is most grateful to you for your-help and cooperation in transmitting viewsattributedto the North Vietnamese Government on negotiations io de;! with the problem of Vietnam. We have carefully examined the sugeestious you have conveyed, and I wish to make the follov.-inj comments 1. As it has repeatedly stated, the United States is prepared to enter into discussions or r.egotiationS with any gOvernment at aav time without any preconditions Whatsoever. We reaffirm this willingness. 2. Although there is some ambiguity in the Statement of Hanois position, your source seems to indicate that Hanoi would agree that negotiations nuglit be undertaken on the basis of the Geneva atee-' ments of 1934 without any qualifications or conditi We for our part would be wi in negotiations on this basis without any qualifications or conditions. go .     3. The United States does not, however, agree with the contention that the four points advanced by Hanoi constitute an authentic interpretation of the Geneva agreements of 1954. Elements in the four points, notably the political program of the so-called National Liberation Front, have no basis in the Geneva agreements, and Hanois apparent insistence on a prior declaration accepting the four points thus appears both to be inconsistent with the agreements and to require a substantive condition to negotiations. Nevertheless, we are prepared to include these four points for consideration in any peace talks along with any propcsaIs which the United States, South Vietnam, and other governments may wish to advance. 4. Your sources also mention another apparent Hanoi condition calling for a cease-fire and other measures prior to negotiations. The United States would, bc prepared for negotiations without the itn-position of any conditions of this nature. However, if a reduction or cessation of hostilities were to be arranged prior to negotiations, it seems self-evident that it would have to bo on an equifable and reciprocal basis. If there were n cessation of certain military activities on the one side, there would have to bc an equivalent cessation of military activities on the other. The formulation proposed by Hanois leaders docs not appear to meet this test, for example, in that it imposes no restraint on the continued infiltration of forces and equipment from North to South Vietnam. 5. The U.S. Government notes the message conveyed that North Vietnam would not insist on the actual withdrawal of American forces prior to the initiation of negotiations. However, the clarification of this point, though not without significance in the light of conflicting public statenvntS by Hanoi on the subject, still leaves the questions discussed in 2 and 3 above. We arc thus far from persuaded that statements by Ho Chi Minh and Fhnm Van Dong quoted by your Italian sources indicate a real willingness for unconditional negotiations. We would bc pleased, for our part, however, on the basis of the considerations Set forth above and perhaps in light of any further soundings your Sources may make with Hanoi to discuss this matter further with you. I have asked Ambassador Goldberg, who bears this letter, to make himself available to you at any time for this purpose. Further, if it develops following such discussionS, or further contact by you with your sources, that a direct discussion with your Italian Sources is deemed fruitful, a representative of the United States would be authorized to meet with them privately. Finally, let me make it clear that you are free to draw on the contents of this letter, in any way you may desire, in communicating with your sources. Wc would weIcome your continuing assistance on this important matter. With the assurance of my highest consideration, Sincerely yours, Deax Rusk. Foreign Minister Faxfaxis Reply To Secretary Rusk, December 13, 1965 Dear Mr. Secretary E received on December 6 your letter which Ambassador Goldberg had previously announced to me on Xovcm-ber 29. The same day I summarized in a document of mine essential observations rne.de by you on various points and I have just received word that on Wednesday last, December S, said document h-ts been confidentially delivered into the hunch of a qualified representative in order to be forwarded to Hanoi. 1 think, as of today, said document has already reached its final destination. ' I would like to add I desire, Mr. Secretary, to thank you very much for the confidence and trust in rny person you and the American Government have confirmed in your letter. I can assure you that, as soon as I receive any reaction on the points contained in the letter, I will inform you imine li.ltely. Anticipating the pleasure of meeting you next week in Washington, I remain, Mr. Secretary, Amixtore Faxfaxi.  Depamn. of St;; Jm. 3,!, pp. 11-13. 23 .     STATEMENT CONCERN INC- 1964 PEACE OVERTURES The North Vietnamese regime has made it clear again and. again that it will not enter into any discussions unless the conditions it has set down for settlement are accepted as the basis of negotiation. These conditions, amounting to a surrender of South Viet-Nam to Com-munist domination, and formulated most forcefully on April 8, 1965 by Premier Pham Van Dong in his "four points," include the withdrawal of United States Military Forces and acceptance of the program of the Viet Cong. Not only have the North Vietnamese reiterated these conditions on numerous occasion's, but they have peremptorily rejected the repeated attempts of the United States to find an avenue to peaceful settlement, including notably the Presidents declaration of April 7, 1965, that we stand ready to engage in unconditional discussions.  . In this regard, the Secretary made-the following statement in his . press conference of November 26, 1965 ...It is true that last autumn Ambassador 'Stevenson was informed by the Secretary General that he had been informed indirectly that Hanoi would be willing to have a contact with the United States and that the Secretary General had suggested Rangoon as a suitable site. "when this matter arose, it was considered in the light of a great deal of information available at the time about the attitude of the authorities in Hanoi and, indeed, of other governments in the Communist world. I am not at liberty to cite all of these contacts, which were numer-oys, but you will recall that the Canadian Minister of External Affairs reported to his House of Commons in June of this year that the Canadian Commissioner on the ICC had made several trips to Hanoi over the eight months prior to the end of May. There were other public indications such as the failure of the Polish proposals on Laos and the refusal of Hanoi to attend the UN Security Council in August. I myself had a number of discussiops with the representatives of ocher governments, including Communist governments. It seems clear beyond a per act venture of doubt that Hanoi Was net prepared to discuss peace in Southeast Asia based upon the agreements of 1954 and 1962 and looking toward the lifting' of aggression against South Viet-Nam. Indeed, in the latter part of 1964 Hanoi increased its infiltration, including units of its regular array. They undoubtedly felt they were on the threshold of victory. Just yesterday Hanoi denied that they had made any proposals for negotiations. 24      1 "Throughout all of last year, the general attitude of the Communist world was that they might consider some device .to save the face of the United States while they themselves imposed their will upon South Viet-Nam. Our attitude was and is that we are not interested in saving face but in saving South Viet-Nam. ."It is worth recalling that President Kennedy and his principal advisers made a far-reaching review cf the situation in Southeast Asia early in 1961, and deter' mincd to do everything possible to find a peaceful settlement based upon the integrity and the safety of the smaller nations of Southeast Asia. President Kennedys talks with Chairman Khrushchev in June 1961 led to agreementin principle on Laos but not on Vief-Nam.The Laotian Conference succeeded in concluding the agreement of 1962, an agreement which failed because Hanoi refused to comply with it in any way, shape or form. Nevertheless, during and after that conference the Unitcd States' has had repeated discussions about the possibilities of a peaceful settlement in Southeast Asia. 'T "Hanoi, in their well known four points, has indicated its basic position on Viet-Nam. They have refused to accept the suggestion that their points can be discussed alongwith all other points presented by other Governments.- ' They, therefore, exclude in advance the position which they knot; the United States will take, namely, that North Viet-Nam must stop its aggression against South Viet-Nam and discontinue its effort to impose the program of the National Liberation Front on South Viet-Nam by force. "There have been many efforts by the United States and by other governments throughout the past five years to achieve peace for the nations of Southeast Asia. Leaving aside all questions of diplomatic procedure there has not been and there is not now any indication from Hanoi that they are prepared to accept the self-determination and independent existence of their neighbors as free countries rather than what the communist countries have come to call their wars of national liberation. 25-      1 "You are familiar with many initiatives which have been taken during the past year to bring this matter from the battlefield to the conference table but you are also familiar with the increased infiltration by North Viet-Nam to impose their will by force. "Our task remains, therefore, that which President Johnson has often stated, namely, to assist our friends in South Viet-Nam to repel the aggression against them and, at the same time, to keep open every possibility of a peaceful scttlement. For this purpose, as President Johnson has repeatedly declared, we are prepared for unconditional discussions with the governments concerned, or, as the 17 nonaligned nations phrased it, negotiations without preconditions." 4l7dJ266BT Office of Public Services Bureau of Public Affairs Department of State washington, D.C. 20520 26      SECRETARY RUSKS NEWS CONFERENCE, NOVEMBER 26, 19G5 (Excerpts) 1Since my return front the Inter-American Conference I have read what has been said during my absence about the so-called peace feelers of last autumn. I have also seen the fragment on this subjeci whtch appeared recently in a national magazine. It is true that last autumn Ambassador Stevenson was informed by Secretary General U Thant that he "had been informed indirectly that Hanoi would be willing to " have a contact with the United States and that the Secretary General had suggested Rangoon as a suitable site. When this matter arose, it was considered in the light of a great deal of information available at the time about the attitude of the . authorities in Hanoi and, indeed, of other govermnents in the Com- muniSt world. I am not at liberty to cite all of these contacts, which were numerous, but you will recall that the Canadian Minister of External Affairs reported to his House of Commons in June of this year that the Canadian Commissioner on the ICC had. made several trips to Hanoi over the S months prior to the entl of May. There were other public indications such as the failure of the Polish proposals on Laos and the refusal of Hanoi to attend the U.N. Security Council in August. I myself had a number of discussions with the repreSentatives of other governments, including Communist governmentS. It seems dear beyond a peradventure of doubt that Hanoi was not prepared to discuss peace in southeast Asia based upon the agreements of 1954 and 1962 and looking toward the lifting of aggresdon against South Vietnam. Indeed, in the latter part of 1964Hanoi increased its infiltration, including units of its regular army. They undoubtedly felt that they were on the threshold of victory. Just yesterday Hanoi denied that they had made any proposals for negotiations. Throughout all of last year, the general attitude of tne Communist world waS that they might consider Some device to save the face of the United States while they themselves imposcd their will upon South Vietnam. Our attitude was and is that we are not interested in saving face but in saving South Vietnam. It is worth recalling that President Kennedy ?.nd his principal advisers made, a far-reaching review of the Situation in southeast Asia early in 1901, and determined to do everything possible to find Ia pcaceful settlement based upon the integrity and the safety of the smaller nations of southeast Asia. President KennedyS talks with Chairman Khrushchev in June 1951 led to agreement in principle on Laos but not on Vietnam. The Laotian Conference Succeeded in concluding the agreement of 19G2, an agreement which failed because Hanoi refused to comply with it in any way, Snape, or form. Nevertheless, during and after that conference the United States has had repeated discussions about the possibilities of a peaceful settlement in southcast Asia. Hanoi, in their well-known four points, has indicated its basic position on Vietnam. They have refused to accept the suggestion that their points can be discussed along with all other points presented by other governments. They, therefore, exclude in advance the position which they know the United States and others will take; namely, that North Vietnam must stop its aggression against South Vietnam and discontinue its effort to impose the program of the National Liberation Front on South Vietnam by force. There have been many efforts by the United States and by other governments throughout the past 5 years to achieve peace for the nations of southeast Asia. Leaving aside all questions of diplomatic procedure, there has not been and there is not now any indication from Ilanoi that they are prepared to accept the self-determination and the independent existence of their neighbors as free countries rather ' than what the Communist countries have come to call their wars of national liberation. You are familiar with many initiatives v.hich have been taken during the past year to bring this matter from the battlefield to the con 27      ference table and you are also familiar with the increased infJtration by North Vietnam to impose- their will by force. Our task remains, therefore, that whirh President Johnson has often slatcd; munely, to assist our friends in South Vietnam to repel the aggression against them and, at the same time, to keep open every possibility of a peaceful settlement. For this purpose, as President Johnson has repeatedly declared, we arc prepared for unconditional discussions with the govenmients concerned, or, as the 17 nonalined nations phrased it, negotiations without preconditions. Question. Mr. Secretary, in the light oj your statement about the Vietnamese situation, ij today we had such an indication through Mr. Thant or any other channel that they were prepared to contact, apparently without specific conditions, would we accept? Answer. Well, the President has said, on more than one occasion, and So have I, that we are prepared for unconditional discussions or, as the 17 nationS put it, negotiations without precondition. In view of the statement made by Hanoi in the last 24 hours, I would not predict that this is likely to occur in the next week or so. Question. Well, would you say, then, that we have somwhat softened our position; that is whereas last year wc sensedwe attached some conditions to our position, that this time- Answer. No, I think this is a problem of nuance here. President Johnson said in April of this year, publicly and clearly, without any doubt whatever, that we are prepared for unconditional diSCUssions.  .' Prior to that time the discussions had been private; that is, our attitude on this had been private. I have myself spent hours and hours and. hours since 1961 with representatives of the other side talking about peace in southeast Asia. There was never any period when we were unwilling to talk about peace in southeast Asia. Now, at the time Iaat autumn, I want to comment, and I cannot pursue it, that this was not the only contact by any means. There were many contacts with the other side, including Hanoi. This was not the only contact. This particuhr incident had to be looked at inagainst the back-ground of a very considerable activity that was going on among the foreign offices of the world, to determine whether or not this particular thing made a significant difference. Question. Mr. Secretary, are you saying that there was no change in American policy in so jar as negotiations ere concerned dating jrom last April 7? Answer. WeIl, in April the President said at Baltimore that we are prepared for unconditional discussions. I think that perhaps that was the first time that it bad been said in just those words publicly. But this was not a major change in the sense that for the past 5 years we have been in continuous contact with representatives of the Communist world about peace in southeast Asia. There has never been any cessation of discussion on this subject. There has has never b-mn any lack of opportunity to bring this matter of peace to the conference, table, if the other side is prepared to Stop trying to impose their will be force on South Vietnam. So that if there was a dinerence in the public way in which this matter was stated, there was no difference in the basic objective of 28 .     the United States, and no difference on the point that we were in regular contact with the Communist world. Question. When you say without preconditions, however, you arc talking only about without preconditions of getting in the same room to open discussions, are you not, because you lifted a number of conditions which the United States would have in terms of the settlement to be reached at any such discussions. ' Answer. Well, I do not suppose that anyone would expect the United States, in agreeing to discussions without preconditions, to imply thereby that wc are going to accept the program of the other side in such dimssions. Question. Therefore you concede that the other side will also come with its preconditions. Answer. Well, we have already said to the other sidewe have already said publicly to the other side that we arc prepared to talk about their proposals along with the proposals of all the other gov-emments concerned, and they have turned that down. Question. Your point is that as of today, aside from the technical problem which you call getting a meeting started, the situation is that wc arc willing to listen to their preconditions for settlement as well as our own, that they are not willing to listen to our preconditions as well as theirs.  Answer. Well, the question of whether, for example, their four points, Mr. Roberts, are preconditioned to any discussion, or any conference, has varied a Iittle over time. There have been moments, quite frankly, when it has appeared that they were rigid preconditions, that these four points would have to be accepted before there can be any serious discussions. There have been other times when we had the impression that there were not necessarily preconditions to discussions, but that they would be the points on which the other side would insist as necessary for peace. I wouldone haS the impreSsion that in recent weeks their attitude has been moving toward these four points ns preconditions somewhat more than might have been our impression for a time. We dont know. We dont know. But what we are saying is that if they want to come, to the conference table, if they want to have discussions, we will discuss, and in those discussions they can say anything that they want to. But we must be free to say anything that we want to. And then we will try to find our whether there is a basis for peace. But we are not going to limit discussions to their four points. Now, these have got to be discussions in which governmentS can talk like governments, discuss their problems, their interests, their demands, to see whether in that kind of mutual discussion there iS any basis for peace. Now, we did that in 1961, on Laos, and it seemed, in the Vienna conversations between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy, that there was a basis for a settlement of the Laotian question. No such basis appeared in discussing Vietnam. We got the conference and the agreement on Laos. And aS I pointed out in my statement, the problem with that is that Hanoi never complied with it. But I dont want to leave the impression that we areI think it is important to be dear on two things; that we are prepared for discusSionS, without .conditions, without preconditions. But we are not going to promise in advance or at any time that we are going to give away the basic interests of the South Vietnamese people and South Vietnam, and the interests of the United States when we go into such discussions. The other side is not goine to do that. So the problem is to find out whelcr, given the attitudes, the interests, the commitments of the two sides, if peace is possible. 29 1 Depute. ct Sde pm retilse No. 076, dated Kev. 15. 1065.       LETTER FROM AMBASSADOR ARTHUR J. GOLDBERG, U.S. REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS, TO SECRETARY GENERAL U THANT, JANUARY 5, 1 OGG 1 His Excellency U Thant, Secretary General, United Nations. Dear Mr. SecreTary GeNeral My Government has during the past 2 weeks been taking e. number of Steps in pursuit of peace which flow in part from our obligations under the United Nations Charter, of which we are most mindful, and in part from the appeals which Ilis Holiness the Pope and you addressed just before Christmas to us and to others. I believe it would be of interest to you, in addition to what we have already communicated to you privately, and to all States members of the United Nations to know more precisely what we have done, and what we have in mind. You will observe that we have aIready responded in terms vehiclt go somewhat beyond the appeals earlier addressed to us. President Johnson dispatched messages, and in several Cases personal repre-Sentatives, to His Holiness the Pope, to the Secretary General of the United Nations and to a coilSiderable number of chiefs of state or heads of government, reaffirming our desire promptly to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Vietnam ana to do all in our power to move that conflict from the battlefield to the conference table. In this connection, our bombing of North Vietnam has not been resumed since the Christmas truce. Among the points made in our messages Conveyed to a number of governments are the following That the United States is prepared for discussions or negotiations without- any prior conditions whatsoever or on the basis of the Geneva Accords of 1954 and L962, that a reciprocal reduction of hostilities could be envisaged and that a cease-fire might be the first order of business in any discussion or negotiations, that the United States remains prepared to withdraw its fortes from South Vietnam as soon as South Vietnam is in a position to determine its own future without external interference, that the United States desires no continuing military presence or bases in Vietnam, that the future political structure in South Vietnam should be determined by the South Vietnamese people themselves through democratic processes, and that the question of the reunification of the two Vietnams should be decided by the free decision of their two peoples. I should appreciate it if this letter Could be communicated to all members of the United Nations as a Security Council document. I should urge them in examining it to recall President JohnsonS letter of July 2S. 19G5, to the Secretary Genera! in which the President invited all members of the United Nations, individually and collec-tively, to use their influence to bring about unconditional discussions, and my letter of July 31, 1965 (document S 6575) to the President of the Security Council in which I said, inter alia, that the United States stands ready, us it has in the past, to Collaborate unconditionally with members of the Security Council in the search for an aCccptable formula to restore peace anil security to that area of the world. I should hope that on the present occasion also organs of the United Nations and all States would give even more earnest thought to what they might do to help to achieve these ends. Sincerely yours, Akthvr J. Goldberg. i V.S. r-'-'n-t to tbs meed MtiloeJ Jm rateue No. tT3l. dated I... S. E4n. 30 .     U.S. OFFICIAL P0SIT10N ON VIETNAM State Department Press Release, January 7, 1SGS 1 The following statements are on the public record about elements which the United States believes can go into peace in southeast Asia 1. The Geneva Agreements of 195-1 and 1962 are an adequate basis for peace in Southeast Asia; 2. We would welcome a conference on southeast Asia or on any part thereof; 3. We would welcome "negotiations without preconditions as the 17 nations put it; 4. We would welcome unconditional discussions as President Johnson put it; 5. A cessation of hostilities could be the first order of business at a conference or could be the subject of preliminary discussions; 6. Hanois four points could be discussed along with other points which others might wish to propose; 7. We want no U.S. bases in southeast Asia; 8. Wc do not desire to retain U.S. troops in South Vietnam after peace is assured; 9. We support free elections in South Vietnam to give the South Vietnamese a government of their own choice; 10. The question of reunification of Vietnam should be determined by the Vietnamese through their own free decision; 11. The countries of southeast Asia can be nonalined or neutral if that bc their option; 12. We would much prefer to use our resources for the economic reconstruction of southeast Asia than in war. If there is peace, North Vietnam could participate in a regional effort to which we would be prepared to contribute at least SI billion; 13. The President has said  The Vietcoug would not have difficulty being represented and having their views represented if for a moment Hanoi decided She wanted to cease aggression. 1 don't think that would be an insurmountable problem. 14. We have said publicly and privately that we could stop the bombing of North Vietnam as a step toward peace although . there has not been the slightest hint or suggestion from the other Side as to what they would do if the bombing stopped. i Department o.' State press reletse No. 4 dated Jaa. 7,1X6. 31      EXTRACT FROM THE PRESIDENTS STATE OF THE UNION' MESSAGE, JANUARY 12, 1936 1  Not too many yen's ago Vietnam was a peaceful, if troubled, land, ln the north was an independent Communist government. In the south ft people struggled to build a nation, with the friendly help of the United States. There were some in South Vietnam who wished to force Communist rule on their own people. But their progress was slight. Their hope of success was dim. Then, little more than G years ago, North Vietnam decided on conquest. From that day to this, soldiers and supjllies have moved from north to south in a swelling stream swallowing the remnants of revolution in aggression. As the assault mounted, our choiCC gradually became clear. We Could leave, abandoning South Vietnam to its attackers and to certain conquest, or we could stay and fight beside the people of South Vietnam. We stayed. And we will stay until aggression has stopped. We will stay because n just nation cannot leave to the cruelties of its encmies a people who have staked their lives and indepctulettce on Americas solemn pledge -a pledge which has grown through the commitments of three American Prc=ideut$. We will stay because in Asiaand around the worldare countries whose independence restS, in large measure, on confidence in Americas word and in Americas protection. To yield to force in Vietnam would weaken that Confidence, would undermine the independenee of many lands, and would whet the appetite of the aggressor. We would have to fight in one Ltnd, and we would have to fight in another or abandon much of Asia to the domination of Communists. And we do not intend to abandon Asia to Conquest. Last year the nature of the war in Vietnam changed again. Swiftly increasing numbers of armed men from the north crossed the border to join forces that were already in the South. Attack and terror increased, Spurred and encouraged by the belief that the United States lacked the will to continue and that their victory was near. Despite our desire to limit conHict, it was necessary- to act to hold back the mounting aggression, to give courage to the people of the south, and to make our firmness dear to the north. Thus we began limited air action against military targets in North Vietnam. We increased our fighting force to its present strength tonight of 190,000 men. These moves have not ended the aggression but they have prevented its Success. The aims of the enemy have been put out of reach by the skill and the bravery of Americans and their alitesand by the enduring couraze of the South Vietnamese who, I can tell you, have lost eight men fast year for every one of ours. The enemy is no longer close to victory. Time is no longer on his side. There is no cause to doubt the American commitment. Our decision to stand firm has been matched by our desire for peace. In 1965 alone we had 300 private talks for peace in Vietnam with friends and adversaries, throughout the world. Since Christmas your Government has labored againwith imagin-atiou and enduranceto remove any barrier to peaceful settlement. 32 .     For 20 clays now we and our Vietnamese alIics have dropped no bombs in North Vietnam. Able and Cxpcrienced spokesmen have visited, in behalf of America, more than 40 countries. We have talked to more than a hundred govemmentSall 113 that we have relations with, and some that we dont. We talked to the United Nations and we have called upon all of its members to nuke any contribution that they can toward helping obtain pcaCC. In public statements and in private communicationsto adversaries and to friends, in Rome and Warsaw, in Paris and Tokyo, in Africa and throughout this hemispbcreAmerica haS made her position abundantly clear. Wc seek neither territory nor bases, economic domination or military alliance in Vietnam. IVe fight for the principle of self-determination that the people of South Vietnam should be able to choose their ov.-n course, chooSe it in free elections without violence, without terror, and without fear. The people of all Vietnam should make a free decision on the great question of reunification. This is ell we want for South Vietnam. It is all the people of South Vietnam want. And if there is a single nation on this earth that dcsires less than this for its own people, then lot its voice be heard. We have also made it clearfrom Hanoi to New Yorkthat there are no arbitrary limits to our search for peace. We stand by the Geneva agreements of 1954 and 1962. We will meet at any conference table, we will discuss any proposals4 points or 14 or 40and we will consider the views of any group. We will work tor a cease-ftre now or once discussions have begun. We will respond if others reduce their use of force, and we will withdraw our soldiers once South Vietnam is securely guaranteed the right to shape its own future. We have said all this, and we have askedand hopedand we have waited for a response. So far we have received no rcsponse to prove cither success or failure. We have carried our quest for peace to many nations and peoples because we share this plr.net with others whose future, in large measure, is tied to our own action, and whose counsel is necesSery to our own hopes. We have found understanding and support. And we know they wait with us tonight for some response that could lead to peace. I wish tonight that I could give you a blueprint for the course of this conflict over the coming months, but we just cannot know what the future may require. We may have to face long, bard combat or a long, hard conference, or even both at once. Until peace comes, or if it does not come, our course is clear. We will act as we must to help protect the independence of the valiant people of South Vietnam, he will strive to limit the conflict, for we wish neither increased destruction nor do we want to invite increased danger But we will give our fighting men what they must have every gun, every dollar, and every decisionwhatever the cost or whatever the challenge.   And we will continue to help the people of South Vietnam care for . those that are ravegeJ by b,ttle, create progress in the villages, and carry forward the healing hopes of peace as best they can amidst the uncertain terrors of war. 33      And Ict me bc absolutely clear the days may become months, and the months may become years, but we will stay aS long as aggression commands us to battle. There may be some who do not want peacewhose ambitionS stretch so far that war in Vietnam is but a welcome and convenient episode in an immense design to subdue history to their will. But for others it- must now be clear the choice is not between peace and victory. It lies between peace and the ravages of a conflict from which they can only lose.   The people of Vietnam, North and South, seek the same things the shared needs of man, the needs for food and shelter and education the chance to build and work and till the soil, free from the arbitrary-horrors of battlethe desire to walk in the dignity of thoSC who master their own destiny. For many painful years, in war and revolution and infrequent peace, they have struggled to fulfill those needs. It b a crime against mankind that so much courage, and so much will, and so many dreams, must be flung on the fires of war and death. To all of those caught up in this conflict, we therefore say again tonight Let us choose peace, and with it the wondrous works of peace, and beyond that, the time when hope reacheS toward Consummation, and life is the servant of life. In this work, we plan to discharge our duty to the people whom we serve. This iS the state of the Union.  . But over it allwealth, promise, and expectationlies our troubling awareness of American men at war tonight. How many men who listen to me tonight have Served their Nation in other wars? Elow very many are not here to listen? The war in Vietnam is not like these other wars. Yet, fineIly, war is always the Same. It is young men dying in the fullness of their promise. It is trying to kill a man that you do not even know well enough to hate. Therefore, to know war is to know that there is still madness in this world. Many of you share the burden of this knowledge tonight with me. But there is a difference. For finally I must be the one to order our guns to Gre, against all the most inward pulls of my desire. For we have children to teach, and we have sick to be cured, and we have men .to be freed. There are poor to be lifted up, and there are cities to be built, and there is a world to be helped. Yet we do what we must. I am hopeful, and I will try aS beat I can, with everything I have got, to end this battle and to return our sons to their desires. Yet as long as others will challenge Americas security and teSt the dearness of our beliefs with fire ana steel, then we must stand or sea the promise of two centuries tremble. I believe tonight that you do not want me to try that risk. And from that belie; your President summons hiS strength for the trials that lay ahead in the days to Come. The work must be our work now. Scarred by the weaknesses of man, with whatever guidance God may offer us, we must nevertheless and alone with our mortality, strive to ennoble the life of man on earth. i HouseD<x=eat No. SCI. -Zh Cor.;., Cd jess. 34      i i ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR ARTHUR J. GOLDBERG, U.S. REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS, AT HOWARD UNIVERSITY, WASHINGTON, D.C. February io, 1967 I appreciate very deeply the honor which Howard University has paid me today. The ideals Howard has stood for, and the pioneering things it has achieved, in its first century are not merely of local but of national and indeed international significance. For the future of our democracy depends on the opportunitysuch as Howard has always sought to providefor eve ) American to develop to the fullest his inborn potential of character and intellect. In pursuit of this irkal I fed certain that Howard will provide in its second century a lcadershipho less important than in the century you have just completed. You may bc sure that when I use the word "Icadership in connection with Howard University 1 am not thinking in the abstract; I am thinking with great admiration and gratitude of one particular leader, your eminent President and my dear friend and colleague, Dr. James M. Nabrit, Jr. As you know, when the President asked me to assume the post of United States Representative to the United Nations and I had to find a Deputy Rcp-resentalive who could share the immense difficulties of that vital work for peace, I sought out Jim Nabrit; and by dint of hard negotiating I managed to get him for one year. During that year I had countless occasions to be grateful for his clear and vigorous mind, his ability to sec to the heart of a . complex problem, his force of character, his charm and persuasivenessall of which made him a most effective and memorable advocate of the UnitCd States in the councils of thc world. I know you are as proud as I am of the services Dr. Nabrit has rendered his country. And much though we at the UN miss him, we must acknowledge that here at Howard University he is still rendering an outstanding service to his country. It seems to me fitting that, in the presence of Dr. Nabrit who shared with me for more than a year in the search for peace, l should report from my I ' 35     By NWD Date 201 I United Nations vantage point on where wc now stand in the unceasing effort to achieve a just and henorable negotiated settlement of the conflict in Vietnam. It is equally fitting that this report should bc made on a university campus, for no issue of our day has brought forth a greater involvement on thc part of our universities than this one question. Our effort to open the door to peace in Vietnam has been continuous. In . ..number of statements, reports and events pronouncements by the govern.. merits invol ved, appcal s by world leaders i nduding Pop e Pat iJ a nd Secretary Gfios ml U Thum nss a ttks ' ' ' and thc perplexing events in Mainland China. Right now we are in thc midst of another pause in the fighting, the Lunar New Year truce. Thus this may be a good moment to assess the present status of our efforts for pOace. In such an assessment, a responsibile official must, in all that he says in public, avoid damaging the hopes for progress through private diplomacy. But in a free society hc must also accept the inescapable responsibility to keep the public adequately informed. It is difficult to deal on both levels at once but it is essential to do so as well as we can. Let me begin, then, by recalling the basic American peace aims-in. Victy nam. These aims have been stated many times by President Johnson and other responsible spokesmen of the United States. They have been stated over a span of two years, but the ebb and flow of the military situation during that time has not made them any less valid as guidelines for peace negotiations. We do not subscribe to the false notion that a strong military position obviates the desirability of seeking peace through negotiations. Today, therefore, I wish to review the essence of these American aims. The .United..Stares, sec.ks .solution i n . Vietnam.. We. do .not .seek the unconditional MUtcndct cf om adversaries. We sefik 1 or whose ten.  t J dtetatt but f tn genuine negotiationsa- sett. i of any party. In the words of the Nhnila Communiques The.settlement of thewar.in.Vi.ee nam depends on the readinses and .willingness ofthe partjecp.nc.erned to explore and 55n.rkpuitpgedera.juit a.ndrejuonablcJtQbJioaM As President Johnson said a week ago here in washington Such a solution will involve . concessions on both parts. we are not en-pged in a holy war against.cqmmuni$m. We do not seek an AmCrkan sphere of mlen.e.in.Asm; nor. a permanent American presence of any kindmilitary or otherwisein Vietnam; nor the imposition of a military alliance on South Vietnam. we do not seek to do any injury to Mainland China nor to threaten anj .of its legitimate interests    We seek to assure to the ; Ie gf South Vietnam the affirmative cxercbc of the right of self-determinationthe right to decide their own poll ' destiny tree of external interference and force and through democratic processes. In keeping with the announced South Vietnamese Governments policy of national recpnciliadon, we do not seek to exelude any segment of the South Vietnamese people front peaceful participation in their countrys future. We are prepared to accept the results of that decision whatever it may be. Vc support the early consummation of a democratic constitutional system in South Vietnam, and tvcIcor.it the progress being made to this end. As regards North Vietnam, wc hayc no designs on its territory, and we dp not seek to overthrow its government whatever its ideology. Vc are prepared fally to respect its sovereignty and territorial integrity and to enter into specific undertakings to that end. we believe the reunification of Vietnam should be decided upon through a free choice by thc peoples of both the North and the South without any outside interference; and the results of that choice also will have our full support.. finally,-when peaceis restored we are willing to .make a major commit; n .nt of money, tpcm and resources to a multilateral cooperative effort to bring to all pf Southeast Asia, including North Vietnam, the benefits of .economic and soci.l rc<u.strujjQQ and development which that area so .sorely needs,. These, then, arc thc peace aims of the United States. They parallel the objectives stated by the South Vietnamese Government at Manila. Our aims are strictly limited and wc sinCerely believe they contain nothing inconsistent with thc interests of any party. Our public pronouncements of themboth in Vashington and a thc United Nationsare solemn commitments by the United States. Our adversaries have also pIaced their aims and objectives on the public rCCord over the past two years. The major statement of these aims is the well-known Four Po>" oEHanot, which I wil(summarize without departing too much from their own terminology. The first point calls for recognition of the basic national rights of the Vietnamese people peace, independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. It also, calls tor the .cess.liioopt.a!! a.cts of .war against the North;the ending of United States intervention in thc South; the withdrawal c; aU United States troops, military personnel and weapons ot a hinds, the dismantling of American bases and the cancellation .of v. r.n they term d e Unite ' ' " The United States would not End any essentia! diEculty with a reasonable interpretation or any of the terms included in this point. Our chief concern is what it does not include namely, that North Vietnam also cease its inter- .     vention m ' I I all of its acts of war against the South, and widv draw its forces frum thc South. Such a requirement is obviously essential to the "peace to which this first point refers. The second point relates to the military clauses of the Ct ' It provides that, pending .th<tpe;.!;.e.fu.LreuDiruaiionQLVietnan'l,.b.otb the North and the South must refrain from joining any military alliance; and that there should be no foreign bases,trpp.ps or.military personnel, in their respective IerritQrK Hrrc again, the onIy real difficulty is the omission of any obligation on the North to withdraw its military forces from thc Southalthough the Geneva Accords which established thc demarcation line in Vietnam forbid military interference of any sort by one side in the affairs of thc other, and even go so far as to forbid civilians to cross the demilitarized zone. , The third point calls for the settlement of the I I i nal affairs in. accordance with the .program of thc National Liberation Front fpr.Sputh Vietnam. This point, of course, was not a part of the Geneva Accords at all. lt introduces a new clement which I shall discuss later in this analysis.  The fourth point calls for the peaceful reunification of Vietnam, to be. settled by the people of both zones without any foreign interference. Wc have no dimculty with this point as was indicated in my speech to the General Assembly on September 22. There has apparcntIy been added a fifth point--put forward and repeatedly endorsed by both Hanoi and thc National Liberauon Front since thc enunciation or the tour points in April, 1965. This fifth point was stated by Flo Chi Minh in January, 1966, when he said that if the United Stans really wants peace, 'toot recognize the National Liberation Frontas the sole genuina represintativc' or the people of South Vietnam, and engage innegotiation v. ith it. This, like thc third of the Four Points, introduces a new clement which was not part of the Geneva ACCOtds.  Now, from this brief summation of our aims and those declared by Hanoi, it is clear that there arc areas of agreement and areas of disagreement. Recent public statements by Hanoi have been helpful in certain aspects, but how great the disagreements are is still uncertain because the stated aims of Hanoi still contain a number of ambiguities. I wculd like to discuss some of these ambiguities because they relate to very consequential matters. Thtre is ambiguity, for example, on the role of the National Liberation Front in peace negotiations. I have already noted the statement of Ho Chi Minh and other spokesmen for cur adversaries who have said that ws must recognize the Front as the sole genuine representative ct the South Vietnamese people, and negotiate will it". It this means that we arc asked to cease our recognition of the Government in Saigon and deal only with the Front, insistence on.this point would imperil the search for peace. For the i      Front has not been chosen by any democratic precess to represent the p.ople of South Vietnam. # Nor has the Front been recognized by the world community. It is pertinent to recall that more than 60 nations recognize the Government of the Republic of Vietnam in Saigon, whereas none recognizes the National Liberation Front as a government. On the pther hanL somcpubiic statements, seem to call for the National Liberation Front tob? given a place or voice at the negotiating table. If this were the postlion of ouradyersanes, the prospects would be brighter; for President John son,, as long-o as July, ..said, that 'The Vigt.Cpog would not have difluky in being represented and in haying their yiewi presented if Hanoi fora moment decides that it wants to cease aggression Ho added  "I think that could be worked out". A further ambiguity relates to the rot of the National Liberation Front in the future political life of South Vietnam. Hanoi asks that the affairs of South Vietnam be settled in accordance with the program of the National Liberation Front". Our adversaries, in their various comments on this point, take no notice of the internationally recognized Government of Seth Victnam or of the steps which the South Vietnamese leaders have taken, and have currently under way, and the institutions they are now cre-ating, for thc purpose of providing their country with a constitutional and representative government. Nor would their statements seem to leave any place for the South Vietnamese who have participated in and promoted such steps. Such an interpretation would pose serious obstacles to a settlement. However, some claim that what the National Liberation Front really seeks is no more than the opportunity to advance its program peacefully along with other elements and groupings in the South in a free political environment. We have already made it clear that we do net wish to exdude any segment of the South Vietnamese people from peaceful participation ip. their countrys future, and that we support a policy of national reconciliation endorsed by the South Vietnamese Government in the Manila Communique. Indeed, as Secretary Rusk said in an interview last week. 1 Viet Cong were to lay down their arms, ways could be found to permit them to take part in the norma! political processes in South Vietnam. FirthCmbilies, cor.cernmg the qustiooftKeip .troppsm. South Vietnam, what dees Hanoi mean by foreign troops? They clearly include in this term thc forces of the United St res and other countries aiding the South, but they have never admitted the presence of their own forces in the South. Ot Course, a one-sided withdrawal by our side 39      would not lead to an acceptable peace. All external forces must withdraw, those of Hanot as well as ours, if peace is to be achieved. There is ambiguity also in Hanois position on the timing ofthe with' drawal of external forces. Do our adversaries consider withdrawal of forces as a precondition to negotiations, as some of their statements imply? If so, this again would raise a serious obstacle to progress. But if they look on I withdrawal of forces as a provision to be incorporated in a settlement, this . clearly could be worked out. The United States and its allies are already on record in the Manila Communique that their forces will be withdrawn . .. as the other side withdraws its forces to the North, ceases infiltration, andthe level of violence thus subsides. Those forces will be withdrawn as soon as possible and not later than six months after the above conditions have bccn fulfilled. Further, we have indicated our willingness to join in a phased and supervised withdrawal of forces by both sides. Next, there is ambiguity in Hanois position on the cessation of bombing of North Vietnam. At times their public, statements have demanded, .that the bombing be ended unconditionally, without any reference to a possible response from dicir side. On the other hand, quirccently a spokesman of Hanoi said that if, after the definitive and unconditional cessation of the bombardments, the American Government proposes to enter into contact with the North Vietnamese Government, . ... this proposal will be examined and studied". And just this week v.e have seen a further statement, in an interview by th. North Vietnamese Foreign Minister, that cessation of the bombings could lead tqtalks between North Vietnam and theJJ.S.i Many of their statements insisting that thc bombing cease have also contained other expressions, such as that the American military presence in South Vietnam be completely withdrawn, and that the Four Points of Hanoi must be recognized and accepted as the" basisor possibly as a . basisfor settlement of the conflict. This creates an additional ambiguity as to whcther Flanoi means to add still other prenegotiating conditions. The position of the United States on this bombing question has bcen stated by a number of Administration spokesmen, including me at the United Nations. The United States remains prepared to take the first step and order a cessation of all bombing or North Vietnam the moment we are assured, privately or oth-rwise, that this step will be answered promptly by I a tangible rc.po.nse, toward peace .from North Vietnam. In his letter of February S to His Holiness, Pope Paul, President Johnson said "... I know you would not expect us to reduce military action unless the other side is willing to do likew ise. wc are prepared to discuss the balanced reduction in military activity, the cessation ot hostilities or any practical arrangements i  I f i ! ! i i r F i  i  t i I 46      which could lead to these results. we shall continue our efforts for a peaceful and honorable settlement until they are crowned with success. Some analysts contend that our terms of settlement should be more precisely defined. But it is very dimCu't to be more precise in advance of negotiation and particularly in light of the substantive ambiguities on the other side. But whatever questions may be raised, they should and can best be resolved in discussions between the parties who have the power to resolve them. For our part, vve stand ready to negotiate in good faith unconditionally to resolve all outstanding questions. Thc United S.ues appro-wh to negotiations is f.cxible. w and our allies do not aiko.'.r atver> >...< t-j i  .tiations, any point of purs to which they may have abjections. Nor do we rule out the discussion of any points of theirs, however difficult they might appear to us. We are willing to discuss and negotiate not only our own points but Hanois Four Points" and points emanating from any other source, including the Secretary General of the United Nations. It remains to be seen whether our a ' i share this concept of nCgo-. tianons. As I have already pointed out, their various public decIarations of peace aims have often been coupled with statements that the goals they put forward must, for example, be accepted or recognized as the sole basis or the most correct basis or the only sound basis or the basis for the most correct political solution. Such statements contain still further ambiguityin one sense the most fundamental of all, since it relates to the concept of negotiation itsclf. Do these statements mean that Hanoi is wilting to enter negotiations only if there nan assurance in advance that the outcome will be on.their terms and will, in c"ect, simply ratify the goals they have already stated? Such an attitude would not be conducive to peace and would make the outlook for a settlement bleak indeed. If, on thc other, hand, North VijJnam were , to say that their points are not pre-conditions to discussions or. negotiations, then the prospects dpuld be more promising. Our negotiating approach would permit each side to seek clarification of the othsr sides position. It does net require the acceptance in advance of . any points, Ieast of all those whose meaning may be in need of clarification. wc do not ask that of Hanoiand progress toward a setdemcnt will bc facilitated if Hanoi does not ask it of us. In this situation, how can we best move toward a settlement? One essential early step is to analyze the positions of all parties in order to ascertain whether there is some element or some kernel common to all. Many students of the subject have pointed to one fact which may prove to be such a kerne!namely, the fact that both sides have pointed to the 41 .     Geneva Agrccments of 1954 and 1962 as an acceptable basis for a peaceful settlement. But I must add quickly that this docs not necessarily indicate a real meeting of the minds, because of doubts that all sides interpret the Geneva Agrecmcnts in the same light. Hanoi has said that the essence of the Geneva Agreements is contained in its Four Points. But the (our points would not put Hanoi under any restraint or obligations in its hostile activities against the South, which the Geneva Accords explicitly prohibit. Besides, as I already pointed out, these points insist that the Souths future be regulated in accordance with the program of a group which was not referred to in the Gcneva ACCords and did not even exist when they were written. And in any case, if the Geneva Accords were to serve as a basts for settlemCnt, it would obviously be necessary to revitalize the international machinery which they provided for supervisionwhich is presently operating under severe limitations; to incorporate effective international guarantees; and to update other provisions of the Accords which on their face are clearly out of date. Despite these problems of interpretation, it can be said that if the meaning of the Geneva Agreements were accepted as a matter for genuine negotiation, then the constant reference to these agrccments by both sides would be more than a verbal similarity; it would be a significant and hopeful sign of the prospects for settlement. From all this analysis, there emerges one basic and practical question, and it is this Flow are all these apparent obstacles to a settlement to be overcome ? The first and essential'pre-requisite is the will to resolve themnot by unconditional surrender or by the dictation of terms, but through a process of mutual accommodation whereby nobody's vital interests are injured, which would be a political solution. Speaking for the United States Govern-mCnt, I alarm without reservation the willingness of the United States to seek and find a political solution. The next question, then, is by what procedure such a political settlement can 'be reached. One well-tested and time-proven way is the conference table. President Johnson has repeatedly stated our readiness to join in a conference tn Geneva, in Asia, or in any other suitable place, we remain prepared today to go to the conference table as scon as, and wherever, our ' adversaries are prepared to join us. There is abo a second procedure by which to pursue a political settlement namely, private negotiationseither by direct contact or through an intermediary. There is much to be said for this private method, for in a situation as grave as this, with its complex historical background and its present political cross currents, it would be exceedingly difneuk to negotiate in a goldfish bowl.i i t .     I therefore alarm that the United States Government stands ready to take this route also toward a political settlement. And we give our assurance that the secrecy and security of such private explorations would be safeguarded on cur side. Of course we do not and should not ask that freedom of expression be curtailed in the slightest degree. Neverthelessas that conspicuous champion of free expression, Dr. Erwin D. Canham, recently reminded usno one's credibility ought to suffer because or what is better left unsaid under such circumstances. Let me quickly add that at this juncture I do not want to raise any false hopes by this remark. I am simply staring a principle which is inherent in the cop.ccpt cf the secrecy and security of private explorations. Such then is my analysis of the problems involved and the methods to be employed in seeking a negotiated solution of the Vietnamese conflict. Nor should we overlook the possibility that negotiations, private or public, might be preceded or facilitated by the process of mutual de-escalation or a scaling down of the conflict without a formally negotiated ceasefire. This, cf course, would be welcome on ourpart. It is altogether possible, too, that there will be no negotiations culminating in a formal agreement; that our adversaries will sooner or later find the burden of the war too exhausting and that the conflict will gradually come to an end. Pcrhaps this will indeed prove to be the outcome. But our most re-spected military authorities have cautioned us not to expect that this will happen quickly, and that we must face the possibility of a long struggle. Surely, if there is any contribution that diplomacy can make to hastening a just and honorable end of this struggle,we gmo in al! conscience spare any effort or any labor, day or night, to make that contributionno matter how diRicult and frustrating the effort may be, or how many false starts and failures and new beginnings it may entail. As student of history know, one obstacle to a negotiated end of any war can be psychological. The frame of mind appropriate to fighting and the frame of mind appropriate to peacemaking are by nature very different. And yet a stage inevitably comes when both these seemingly contradictory efforts must go on side by side. Many citizens, vicwing this complex dual process, are likeIy to be confused and distressed by what seems like an inconsistency in their leaders policies. Some complain that the talk of peace suggests a weakening of our resolve and ot our will to win. Simultaneously others complain chat the con-tinued military effort suggests an attempt co bring the adversary to his knees, to break his willand thus casts doubt on the sincerity or our will to peace. The great difficulty of achieving peace should Serve to remind us that there are subitanual conflicting interests at stake which stubbornly resist .     solution; that peace cannot be bought at any price, nor can real confiCts of purpose be waved away with a magic wand. By the same token, thc ferocity of war should not be an incitement to hatred but rather a stern dis-cipIinea reminder of the imperative duty to define responsibly thc limited interests for which our soldiers fight and which a peace settlement must protect. The cflort to make such a responsible definition, and to carry it through thc process of peace negotiations, is piled high with difficulty. A genuine meeting of the minds may never be wholly achieved. It is unlikely that terms of settlement for this stubborn conflict can be found which would be whoIly pleasing to either side. Duc it is in cur highest national interest that an acceptable, livable solution should be found. Let no one suppose that patriotism, which is so inspiringly displayed on the battlefield, is not aIso present at thc nCgotiating table. All our recent Presidents have testified to our countrys dedication to negotiation as a means of peacefully bridging differences. President Eisenhower said in 1955, on the eve of thc first Summit Conference with the Soviet Ieadcrship Wc shall work with al! others so that peaceful and reasonable negotiations may replace the clash of the battlefield. Presidcnt Kennedy, in his Inaugural Address, said "Let us never negotiate out of fear. But let us never fear to negotiate. And Prcsident Johnson has summed up the true value of negotiation as follows To negotiate is not to admit failure. It is to show good sense. We believe that collective bargaining is working as long as parties stay in negotiation. Only when bargaining breaks off do we speak of failure. And so also in foreign policy. There, too, thc rulc of law and the resort to thc bargaining table arc the hallmarks of success. And to these words thc President added specifically This rule applies without qualification to Vietnam. we shall count it a mark of success when all the parties to that dispute are around a conference table. wc Americans are experienced in bargaining; wc have nothing to fear from negotiation. And wc Americans know the nature of a fair bargain; none need fear negotiating with us. I am sure all three of these Presidents would agree today that the eftort to discover through negotiation, the common ground on which to build a just and honorable peace, is worthy of our most sincere and dedicated efforts    --- His Excellency ( Ho Chi Minh President Democratic Republic of Vietnam Dear Mr. President I sin writing to you in the hope that the conflict in Viet-na.m can be brought to an end. That conflict has already taken a heavy toll--in lives lost, in wounds inflicted, in property destroyed, and in simple human misery. If we fail to find a just anti pcacej.ul solution, history will judge us harshly. lhej.CJ.dc, I believe that we both have a heavy obligation to seek earnestly the path to peace. It is in response to that obligation that I am wrlting directly to you. We have tried ovc. the, past several years, in a variety of vzays and tlnovgh a numuer of channels, to convey to you and your colleagues our desire to achieve a peaceful settlement, lor whalcvc. itasons, these efforts have not achieved any results. t Jt r.  .. It nay Do that our thoughts and yours, our attitudes and yours, have been distorted or misinterpreted as they passed through these various channels. Certainly that is always a .. danger in indirect communi.cation.There is One good way to overcome this problem and to move forward in the search for a peaceful settlement That is for us to arrange for direct talks between truslt rep?e-sentatives m & secure setting and away from the qlare of publicity. Sucn talks should not be used as a propaganda exn-cise but should be s serious effort to find a workable a-d mutually acceptable solution. In the pas, two weeks, I have noted public statements bv representatives of your government suggesting that you would'bprepared to enter into direct bilateral talks with rem-es=nta-tives of the US Government, provided that we ceased "unco ditionelly" and pern,?,neatly our bombing opera tiers snst your- country and alI military actions against it. In last day, serious and responsible parties have assured us indirectly that this is in fact your proposal. 7 Let me frankly state that I see two great difficulties with this proposal. In view of your public position, such action on our part would inevitably produce worldwide specula tion that discussions were under way and would impair the .     . . f  . -2 privacy and secrecy of those discussions. Secondly, there would inevitably be grave concern on our .part whether your government would make use. of such action by us to improve its military position. With these problems in mind, I am prepared to move even further towards an ending of hostilities than your Government has proposed in either public statements or through private, diplomatic channels. I am prepared ta order a cessation of bombing against, your country and the stopping of further augmentation of US forces in South Viet-Nam as soon as I aiu assured that infiltration into South Viet-Nam by land and by sea has slopped. These acts of restraint on both sides would, I believe, make it possible for us to conduct serious and private discussions leading-toward an early peace. ' J. make this proposal to you now with a specific sense of urgency arising from thc imminent New Year holidays in Viet-. Nam. If you are able to accept this proposal I see no reason why it could not. take effect at the end of the New Year, or Tetj holidays. The proposal. I have monde would be greatly strengthened if your military authorities and those, of the Government of South Viet-Nam could promptly negotiate an extension of the Tet truce. ' As to the site of the bilateral discussions I propose, there are several possibilities. We could, for example, have our representatives meet in Moscow where contacts have already occurred. They could meet in some other country such as Burma. You may have other arrangements or sites in mind, and I would try to meet your suggestions. The important thing is to end a conflict that has brought burdens to both our peoples, and above all to the. people of South Viet-Nam. If you have any thoughts about the actions I propose, it would be most important that I receive them as soon as possible. Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson 46 .   NND 633 16.  To His Excellency Mr. Lyndon B. Johnson, President, United States of America, Your Excellency bn February 10, 1967, I received your message. This is my reply. Vietnam is thousands of miles-away from the United States. The Vietnamese people have never done any harm to the United States. But contrary to the pledges made by its representative at the 1954 Geneva conference, the U.S. Government has ceaselessly intervened in Vietnam, it has unleashed and intensified the war of aggression in South Vietnam with a view to prolonging the partition of Vietnam and turning South Vietnam into a neo-colony and a military base of the United States. For over two years now, the U.S. Government has, with its air and naval froces, carried the war to the Democratic Republic of (North) Vietnam, an independent and sovereign country. The U.S. Government has committed wav crimes, crimes against peace and Against mankind. In South Vietnam, half a million U.S. and satellite troops have resorted to thc most inhuman weapons and the most barbarous methods of warfare, such as napalm, toxic chemicals and gases, to massacre our compatriots, destroy crops, and raze villages to the ground. In North Vietnam, thousands of U.S. aircraft have dropped hundreds of thousands of tons of bombs, destroying towns, villages, factories, schools. In your message, you apparently deplore the sufferings and destruction in Vietnam. May I ask you who has perpetrated these monstrous crimes? It is the . United States nd satellite troops. The U.S. Government is entirely responsible for the extremely serious situation in Vietnam. The U.S. war of aggression against the Vietnamese people constitutes a challenge to the countries of the socialist camp, a threat to the national independence movement, and a serious danger to peace in Asia and the world. The Vietnamese people deeply love independence, freedom and peace. But in the face of the U. S, aggression, they have risen up, united as one man, fearless of sacrifices end hardships. They are determined to carry on their resistance until they have won genuine independence and freedom and true peace. Our just cause enjoys strong sympathy and support from the peoples of the whole world, including broad sections of the American people. The U.S. Government has unleashed the war of aggression in Vietnam. It must cease this aggression. That is the only way to the restoration of peace, The U.S. Government must stop definitively and unconditionally its bombing raids and all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, withdraw from South Vietnam all U.S. and satellite troops, recognize the South Vietnam National Front for Liberation, end let the Vietnamese people settle themselves their own affairs. Such is the basis (sic) content of the five-point stand of the government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, which embodies the essential principles and provisions of thc 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam, it is the basic (sic) of a correct political solution to the Vietnam problem   c, . v. 'T In your message, you suggested direct talks between the Democratic ' .. J Republic of Vietnam and the United States. If the U. S. Government really wants. these taIks, it must first of a 11 stopNunconditionally its bombing RaidsmuL all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. It is only after the unconditional cessation of the U.S. bombing raids and all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam that the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the United States could enter into talks end discuss questions concerning the two sides. The Vietnamese people will never submit to force, they will never accept talks under the threat of bombs. Our cause is absoultely just. It is to be hoped that the U.S.'Government will act in accordance with reason. Sincerely, Ho Chi Minh .    MARCH 28, 1967 ' WE raESS . N0. 7O SECRETARY RUSK'S NEWS CONFERENCE OF MARCH 28, 1967 "The following is the State Department's release of Secretary of State Dean Rusks news conference, which is authorized for direct quotation SECRETARY RUSK Earlier today, the Secretary General of the United Nations, U Thant, made public some proposals which he had offered to a number of governments involved in the problem in Viet-Nam on March 14. The following day, we gave the Secretary General our interim reply, stating that we welcomed his initiative and,.after consultation with the Government of Viet-Nam end other allies, we would give him a more considered reply. On March 18, we delivered that reply to the Secretary General,, ana you now have that in front of you. In essence, the Secretary General proposed that there be a general standstill truce in Viet-Nam, that there then be preliminary talks leading to a 49 .     .' PR 70 reconvening of the Geneya Conference.  . In our reply, we stated tha,t we accepted the outline of his proposals, that we would be glad to . i   ----' negotiate the standstill truce, and take part in pre liminary discussions leading to a reconyening of that conference,  We do not yet have in front of us the full text of whatever reply Hanoi may have delivered to the Secretary General. Whether Hanoi will make that public I do not now know. We do have a public statement from Hanoi which seems   t . to indicate their attitude. That public statement of yesterday said that .. "To call on both sides to cease fire and hold . unconditional negotiations, yzhile the United States is committing aggression against Viet-Nam, and taking 'serious steps in its military escalation in both zones . of Viet-Nam, is to make no distinction between the aggressor and the victim of aggression, to depart from reality, and to demand that the Vietnamese people accept the conditions of the aggressors." And then it adds "And, by the v;ay, it is necessary to underline 50 . Section 3 3    t <- PR 70 once again the views of the Government of Hanoi, vzhich has pointed out that the Viet-Nam problem has no concern < with the United Nations, and the United Nations has absolutely no right to interfere in any way in the Viet-Nam question."  < I>?., The indications are, therefore, that Hanoi has once again taken a negative view toward an initiative taken by someone else to move this matter toward peace. '  . ..   ; . , . t I might say that the recent publication of the exchange betvzeen President Johnson and Ho Chi Minh; a , end. todays publication of the proposals of the Secretary General, and the responses to it, illustrate the problem . that' we have had from the beginning in bringing the Viet-Nam problem to a peaceful conclusion. Many governments, many groups of governments, many world personalities, have tried to take an initia- . tive to move this conflict toward a peaceful settlement. constructive has invariably vituperative '  51 l .N There has invariably been a positive and a response from the United States; and there been a negative and hostile and, at times,     By NWD Dale 2011  ,r  -i ' ... PR 70 , response from the authorities in Hanoi. When one looksback oyer the long record of initiatives taken by many u personalities and governments, and groups of governments, one sees the record of Hanoi's intransigeance, vzith such phrases as "swindle," and "farceand words of .that sort.- --nr  -----  Now, we do not ourselves belieVe that peace is not the business of the United Nations.. We believe- that no nation can say that a world organization representing 1 '    122 nationscannot properly take up the question of maintaining the' peace. The  f., V. "Charter provides for it; the obligations of the nations of the world are involved; and the issue of peace is at , . stake, 'Nevertheless, we have never insisted that the United Nations is the sole mechanism for dealing with > this question. There is noyz pending before the Security Council a resolution offered by the United States -calling for a peaceful settlement of this problem. That has been resisted in the United. Nations because of   .    By NWD Dale 2011 .. ' PR 70 . , ' ' '. 'of the United Nations, when the Soviet Ambassador said at the Security Council that "This is not the .  business of the U. N., it is a matter for the Geneva machinery," Ambassador Goldberg said, "All right. If that is your view, we will agree with that; then let-- ---s. z.- , goar- .  --- ------- ....  us use the Geneva machinery." But the Geneva machinery has been paralyzed . Joy the attitude of Hanoi, and Peking. For example, 't thELt machinery has not been available to respond favor-ably to Prince Sihanouk's request that the Inter- ' national Control Commission step up its activities tos ,m A  ns ? t s s e t  ..-.ensure the neutrality and the territorial integrity of Cambodia. That machinery was not available, to ensure . the demilitarization of the Demilitarized Zone between North and South Viet-Nam.  So vze would say to the authorities in Hanoi that, surely, there must be some machinery somewhere which can open the possibilities of peace, If not the United Nations, then the Geneva machinery; if not the Geneva machinery, then the resources of quietA   ; ' t  diplomacy, n 4------------- ---- ..I can tell you, now that the exchange between ' ... .. 53 .     PR 70 -i President Johnson and Ho Chi Minh has been made public, and U Thant's proposals and our reply have been made public, that there is nothing in the private record which throvzs any different light on th5,s situation than I you novt have in the public record. Despite all of the efforts made privately by many people in many places, the private record and the public record are now in agreement. ... .J I do hope that the authorities in Hanoi would give serious thought to the present situationIf they have supposed that they would be able to obtain a military victory in the South, they must, surely, now put that hope aside. If they have had any hope that there would be a political collapse in South Viet-Nam, surely, . they must now know that all of the groups in South Viet-Nam, vho have some differences among themselves, are resolved to bring into being a Constitutional Government in which those various groups can work together on a basis of the free choice of the South Vietnamese people vzith respect to their future; and that one point, on which'they are generally agreed in South Viet-Nam, is that they do not wish the program 54       . , 1 pK 7o of Hanoi dr the Liberation Front. If Hanoi supposes that somehovz international opinion will come to their rescue, surely they must   . know that When they rebuff the United Nations Organiaa- tion, an organization of 122 members, that this will not bring them support in other parts of the world"And, surely, they must understand that all small nations who are within the reach of some greater power have a Stake in the ability of South Viet-Nam to determine its .- " oytn future for itself. And, surely, Hanoi must not be  under continuing misapprehension .that, somehovz, some divisions within the United States might cause us to c hange our attitude toward our commitments to South Viet-Nam. Because although there may be some differences among us, those differences are trivial compared to the differences between all of usz on the one side, and Hanoi on the other. So we would hope that in some, fashion, in some way, at some time, the authorities in Hanoi will make use of some machinery in which to be responsiveto the many efforts which we and others have been making toward peace over the'last 'several years..  -55 . nation and the and His Holiness . the President of . could  Ithat, . their      ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------- ' . I' ' t .  ; " PR 70 . It is no good to brush aside the' 17 nonaligned .)  -J--' British Commonwealth of Prime Ministers, . the Pope, the Secretary General,- and i ' India, and all the others who have .' been trying to find some basis on which this matter be moved toward a peaceful conclusion, and suppose somehow, world opinion is supporting them in efforts to seize South Viet-Nam by force, . So we would advice them to believe that, as ' fr .as we are concerned, we are not calling the search for a peaceful settlement to an end because of Ho Chi Minhs reply to President Johnson, or because of the . A .attitude which they seem to be taking toward U Thant's ' most recent proposals. We shall continue that effort . Dy private and public means, md we would hope that we .  vzould get some response through some channel that would begin to bring this thing within the range of discussion and matte it possible to move toward a peaceful settlement. NoW, I'am ready for your questions. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS; Q Mr. Secretary, you have outlined all of . the reasons vzhy they,' surely, must not believe these various elements. What is it then you think that makes   ' 56     . PR 70 z them keep on fighting and refusing to negotiate in the face of ythat must be a loss of international support, and these other adverse factors?  A Well, it is very hard to say. I can't enter into the minds of the leaders in Hanoi on a matter of that sort. I vtould suppose, really, that they are under some misapprehension. They are making some misjudgments and miscalculations on some point; either the state of international opinion, or the state of opinion within the United States, Its possible even that they still have some slender hopes of some military success in the South. I just don't know what is in their minds. But Vhat I am saying is that, so far as we understand their point of view, the principal pillars of their hopes are eroding from under them, and they should become interested in peace, and at an early date and not at some long delayed future date. Q Mr. Secretary, your statement today in reply to U Thant has said that there would be "an appropriate involvement for the Government of South Viet-Nam throughout ' A . 57     - the entire process of' arranging a peace; ' A, .. .Would, you spell that out a little more, sir? V Premier Ky has been indicating that we havent . called him in.. .' . . V . ,. ...  . -.A .Well, obViously, any discussion with  . w -y .... -- North Viet-Nam about , peace in Viet-Nam must directlyinvolve the Government of South Viet-Nam, Indeed, as . r ---you. know, the Government.of South Viet-Nam has on .. ;.- more, than one . occasion suggested direct talks between , ...  , --South Viet-Nam and North Viet-Nam. They have proposed, .; '-. --for-example,  that the two. governments there get together 1-'on the question of possibly extending the Tet standdown, the Tet Cease-Fire, We would support that as a means for coming to grips with this problem. We would think that it would be a very good idea if Hanoi were to accept the I proposals of-South Viet-Nam for direct talks to move I this toward a peaceful solution. i There are many opportunities available, you see. ----  ". n . 4 There would be direct talks between Saigon and . Hanoi. There would be talks between ourselves and      PR 70 Hanoi. There would be talks under the auspices of the tvo Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conferences, or under the auspices of the three member's of the International Control Commission. Or there could be intermediaries such as the Secretary General of the United Nations or some other distinguished governmental or non governmental leader, Any of these methods are appropriate and useful, as far as yze are concerned. The problem is that no one has been able to find a procedure or a method Yhich, apxaarently, is agreeable to Hanoi. Q Mr. Secretary? A Yes, If Hanoi persists for months years in its attitude, yhat will our response, then be? Q What will our course be? A We shall meet our commitments in South .     . .> M 1 PR 70 Q Mr. Secretary, at the end of the Korean V7ar, as I recall, we entered into talks without a truce .; and the fighting continued for two years. Would you . explain, would this formula to which you have responded  ., . i today, could it be a lead to that same sort of thing, ' peace talks without any change 'in the fighting? a  A Well, let me remind you, Mr. Harsch, of  ourjmgst elementary position on this matter of talksWe will talk this afternoon or tomorrow morning without ; any conditions of any sort on either side. We are pre- ; pared to talk while the shooting is going on. If the other side wishes to raise major conditions, as they have . with their demand that there be an unconditional permanent cessation of the bombing, we are prepared to talk about conditions. We will discuss the conditions which must precede the initiation of formal negotiations. Or if they do not wish to start at that end--that is, what do you do about the shooting-we are prepared to start at the other end what do you do about a final settIenent cf the problem? And work back from that to the practical means by which you reach the final settlement. So we are prepared to talk without any conditions of any sort, or about conditions.'.. 60     ' f PR 70 . ' i .. t ' . ' t . " Nt- . A >, Now, let me say that we don't ourselves fully understand why there cannot be discreet talks even though the shooting is going on. Nov, we are aware of 1  . , . ' . the element of so-called face, but face is not a suhsti- tute for very serious practical problems that we face on the military side. Now, I remind you that we discussed Berlin while the blockade vtas still in effect. We discussed .. ' Korea while the hostilities vzere still in effect. In .  deed, we took more casualties in Korea after the negotia- . ..  --;tions started than had occurred before the negotiations G started. We talked about the Cuban missiles while the Cuban missile sites vtere being built by the hour in Cuba. So we are prepared to talk without any, chancre in the military situation whateverBut we are also prepared to talk about -changes in the military situation, what we cannot do is to commit ourselves to a permanent and unconditional stoppage of the bombing without knowing what the practical results of that will be on the military side. No one has been able to tell us, for example, just as one example, that if we stop the bombing those three divisions or more of North Vietnamese troops thatA 61 ' '      ; . PR 70 'i .'r are now in and on both sides of the Demilitarized Zone will not advance to attack our Marines who are six miles away. f ... " ,  R ?  . Now, obviously, these are important practical questions. So we will talk at this moment, or we will talk about any other circumstances in which the other side might think that they might wish to talk. But vzhat we cannot do is to stop half the war and let the other half of the war go on unimpededQ Mr Secretary, when you refer, when we referred in our reply to the Secretary General to a general stand-still truce, are we talking at that point of a cessation of the bombing, and cessation of infiltration from the North? . A I would suppose that a general stand-still truce would involve an elimination of all military action of all sorts on both sides. Now, one reason why there has to be some discussion of that is that it is necessary for both sides to understand what in fact will .happen, particularly in a guerrilla situation where the situation on the ground is somewhat complicated. And so there needs to be some discussion of that point if it is to be a protracted stand-still. '   " 62-.     But-if that can be achieved, then we can move into the preliminary political discussions which might open the way for a reconvening of the Geneva Conference or some other appropriate forum. But a military standstill vzould involve the concept of stopping the military action on both sides, and that .certainly would include stopping the bombing.Mr. Secretary, just how does this formula today differ from Mr. Thant's previous formula? a ? A well, I think that he would perhaps be .. -' the better one to comment oh that. If there is a major difference, I think that this docs place emphasis upon a mutual stop of the military action on both sides as an important first step. As far as his earlier proposals were concerned, the three-point proposals, you recall that they envisage that we would stop the bombing as the first point. The second point, that there would be a mutual de-escalation of the military action; and, third, there would be discussions among all those involyed in the conflict. VJe said, "Your point one, stopping the bombing, gives us no particular problem, but what do you have from the other side about point two?" Well, what he had from 63      ..PR 70 ' at ' ' '' the other side about point two was a complete rejection, that there will be no mutual de-escalation of military I.  a action'  .'-. And on point three, the question of discussions with all the parties involved in the fighting, the other side has consistently said in and oub--from time to time, rather--that the Liberation Front must be accepted as the sole spokesman for thc South Vietnamese people>We find disturbing the refusal of Hanoi to en- gage in discussions with'the Government in Saigon. We think that would be an appropriate way to begin such dis cussions, and the possibilities of peace might be opened up if that channel were to become active. But thus far Hanoi has refused to exercise itQ Mr, Secretary, how would you distinguish between this proposal and the Presidents proposal to Ho Chi Minh? A Well, I think that perhaps the Secretary General's proposal is somewhat broader, in that it would presumably apply to a cease-fire throughout all of VietNam, South Viet-Nam as well as.the disengagement militarily betvteen North Viet-Nam and South Viet-Nam. So to that extent, it is somewhat broader. But, nevertheless, A 64      PR U that is something which we are perfectly prepared to discuss with" representatives from the other side, or x are perfectly prepared to have the Government of Saigon discuss with the representatives from Hanoi. Q Mr. Secretary, what is your answer to those critics who say that the Presidents letter in effect raised the American price? . Well, I dont understand vzhat they are talk- ing about Well, they say that in this letter the United States is demanding proof in advance that infil- tration would have stopped.We didn't talk about proof in advance. The words used were "assurances that infiltration had stopped." Q Well, it is your contention that the price xs not raised, that youre on the status quo ante as far as that is concerned? . The principal point here is that Hanoi has increasingly emphasized during this past year its inflexible demand that a stop in the bombing be permanent and unconditional, and that in exchange for 69 .     . .. .-  ' . PR 70 . ' . -that, there vzould be no' indication from Hanoi as to S.s  z e what comparable or corresponding military action they would take on their side. I . Now, just recall, for example, during the 37  .--r day pause at the beginning of last year, Ho Chi Minh sent a letter to the Heads of Communist States, and in that letter he demanded that the United States must end unconditionally and for good all bombing raids and other acts, war acts against the Democratic Republic of VietNam. Only in this way can a political solution of the Viet-Nam problem be envisaged.Now, that insistence upon the stoppage of the bombing, which would be permanent and unconditional, has been a major increase in the public demands of Hanoi ' during this past year. And that makes it necessary for us to know what would happen if we committed ourselves . to any such cessation. The North Vietnamese representative in Paris on February 22nd said that we must state in advance at the time of any cessation of bombing that it would he permanent and unconditional. Well, that means that we must know what the eff&cts would be. Will the infiltra- ...------ --- ---- . .- ------------------------------ tion continue? Will those three divisions move against ' N 66 .     PR 70 our Marines? Are they going to continue their half of the war?" No one has been able to whisper to us that that would not be the result. No one, private citizens, governments, Hanoi's own representatives, governments ; friendly to Hanoi. No one has been able to whisper to that there would be any change in the present military tactics and strategy of Hanoi with respect to seizing South Viet-Nam by force. If any of you gentlemen have any information to the contrary, I would be glad to hear it Q Mr. Secretary A Yes? Q May I ask you if the channels directly to Hanoi remain open after this exchange of letters, and if so, are we putting these propositions that you have just stated directly to them? A As far as we are concerned, the channels remain open. They have been open all along I have referred to the fact that nothing we have had privately throws any different light on what you now know publicly i about the., attitude of the two sides. But I shouldnt exaggerate the point that channels remain open. When.you 67      Fit O pick up the telephone and nobody answers on the other end, is that a channel or not? Or if you find yourself in a telephone conversation and the other end hangs up, I will leave it to you as to whether that is a channel I can say at the moment that our channels are not very efficient, to say the least Q Mr, Secretary, is the amount of reciprocity that we would require for stopping the bombing a negoti- ' 1 able commodity, or is there a decisivemust there be a complete stoppage in infiltration, or is   .'.' it negotiable? ' , ' A I don't vzant to give a categorical response. to that because President Johnson in a recent press con-ference said that we would be glad to hear of almost anything from the other side. But that doesn't mean that we can live on just nothing from the other side, just nothing. I point out to you that during the Tet pause, at the end of which Ho Chi Minh gave his reply to the letter which President Johnson had sent to him at the be ginning of the Tet pause, he had some other alternatives open to him, . If there was a problem of time, he could have said, "Mr. President, time is rather short here. We 68 .     PR 70 need a little more time on this." He didnt say that. Or he could have said, "I dont particularly like your proposal, but here are my counterproposals." He didnt 1 -. say that. In effect, he called for the capitulation of South Viet-Nam and capitulation of the American forces in South Viet-Nam, and a permanent and unconditional stoppage of the bombing. That we can't take. Yes, sir? Q Mr. Secretary, when you talk about the public and private record, being the same, what exactly do you mean? Do you mean there is nothing outstanding -now privately in the way of negotiation? No. What I'm saying is there is nothing in the private record that reflects any different view on the part of the authorities in Hanoi than you now have on the public record. Q Mr. Secretary, could you explain why you > haven't published the text of four other letters that you recently sent to Hanoi? A Because we do not wish ourselves to establish the point that a private communication with us is impossible, ff Hanoi wishes to make public a 69     By NWD Date 201 I EK U communication from us, as they did in conneCtion with the exchange betvzeen President Johnson and Ho Chi Minh, ' that is a choice which they can make. But I think it .   . could be very important in the future that Hanoi at . least know that it is possible for them to communicate privately with us v.ithout its becoming public, to the extent that you gentlemen would let us get away with that.". Q Mr . Secretary, Point (b) of the United . States ansver talks about preliminary talks. Whats . your understanding of who would take part-in those talksjust Hanoi and Washington, or would it be Saigon or the NLF? A Well, we haven't formulated that in great detail because we need to know what the attitude of Hanoi would be and what the general situation would be. In our reply we did say that of course the Govern- ment cf South Viet-Nam will have to be appropriately in- volved throughput this entire process, and that the interests and views of our allies would also have to be taken fully into account. So we did not try to make that precise in detail hecause we would be interested in ,  -J 70.      . , PR 70 knotting what Hanoi's response to the Secretary Generals. ' . initiative would be. ' . Q Mr. 'Secretary, you referred to the fact that there was no contradiction between the public and private record as far as peace talks are concerned'I wonder if you would be prepared to comment now on '  reports concerning the possibility of negotiations in Warsaw'A If your question is would I be willing to, the answer is no. I think the attitude of Hanoi on these matters is fairly clear at the present time, but 1 I do not want to point the finger to, or close the door on, any contacts that might occur anywhere in any capital as far as the future is concerned. Q Mr. Secretary, thank you very much.  A-  i      THE PATH TO VIET-i'AM;  LESSON IN INVOIATT'EiiT by William. P. Bundy, Assistant Socrottny for F r.t Asian mrl Fecific Affairs. August 15, 1967. -X   X- Cornerstones of U.S. Polity In essence (a) Our objective remained solely that of protecting the independence. of South Viet-Nam from external interference and force. Wc declined, and still decline, to threaten the re-gitno in North Viet-Nam itself or thc territory and regime of Communist China. (b) We indicated in April of 1965 that we were prepared for discussions or negotiations without Condition, and wc have relentlessly pursued our own efforts to enter into meaning-ful discussions as well as following up on a host of peace initiatives by others. Unfortunately, Hanoi has clung firmly to the objective of insuring a Communist takeover of South Viet-Nam and has refused to enter into any fruitful discussions. Indeed, Hanoi has rejected any discussions whateverinitially unless its basic objective was accepted in advance through thc so-called "third point, more recently unless wc agreed to a complete cessation of the bombing without any responsive action on their part. Hanois philosophy toward negotiation has now become authoritatively, available, particularly in the section on fighting while negotiating in the capttired remarks of one of the North Vietnamese leaders, Comrade Vinh. (c) We continued to place every possible em-phasts on the crucial nonmilitary aspects of the conflict, greatly strengthening our own contribution to the essentially South Vietnamese task of restoring stability and control in the countryside and working for the welfare of the peopIc. (d) AEiIitarily, our actions were directed to proving to North Viet-Nnm that its effort to take over the South by military force must fail and to extending and enlarging the areas in which the vital business of bringing real se curity and peace to the countryside could go foSward with all the strength we could hope togive it. The total elTort in Um South remained primary, even as the bomlino- of military tar-gets in the North was carried oninitially to demonstrate resolve but always and basically to make Hanois infiltration far more difiicult and colily and to prevent levels of new men and equipment that could only, in the arithmetic of guerrilla warfare, multiply many times over, for each addition from Norih Viet-Nam, thc requirement for forces in the South. (e) We encouraged the South Vietnamese in their own resolve to move to a constitutional basis of government, a process set underway formally by Prime Minister Ky in January of 1966 and followed since that time in the face of all the difficulties and dangers of attempting to create such a basis in a country without political experience and ravaged by terrorism and by guerrilla and conventional military action. (f) We encouraged the South Vietnamese at thc same time Io proceed on the true that has now become reconciliation, the holding out to members of thc Viet Cong of the possibility of reentering the political life of their country under peaceful conditions. In essence, we sock, and would accept a fair determination of the. will of the people of South Viet-Nam along the lines well summarized by Ambassador Gold-benfs Chicano speech of May 12, 1961. These were thc South Vietnamese aspects of our policy. But then, as previously, the policy was seen in the wider context of the future of Southeast Asia. So it was that President Johnson lent our strong support in April of 1965 to the development of regional cooperation and of economic projects created through Asian initiative By this vital element in our policy, we made clear again that our underlying objec-tive was it do what we could to assist in the constructive task of bringing about a South-. east AsH of cooperative and independent na-tions, whatever their international postures might be. We had a security job to do in Viet-Nam and were joined over time by five other area nations in supplying military forces to do that job. And we are assisting Thailand against a concerted Chinese Communist and North Vietname cf-forl at external subversion, an effort begunto keep the record straightas early as 1962 and clearly and definitively by December 196-1, before our major decisions' in Vict-Nam. Our SEATO and ANZUS undertakings remain firm. 72     By NWD Datc 2011 But we looked beyond these, and we must Still loo' beyond these, to the whole question of thc future of Southeast Asia and to the role that we can play in assisting Ilie nations of the area to consolidate their national indopenclenCe and to improve the welfare of their people. This, then, is a barebones account of "The Path to Viet-Nam. Even within its own terms, it may omit what others would include. And, long as it may scent, it is still incomplete in two respects that it would take far too much time to Cover. First, it is plainly inadequate to focus solely on our policies toward Viet-Nam or even toward Southeast Asia aS a whole. Those policies arc intimately related to the rest of Asia; to ths itn-plications of Asian developments for other areas and, in the last analysis, for our own national security; and to our central world pur-posethc creation of an international order of independent states. Secondly, I have tried to isolate what I consider to have been the major policy decisions. Obviously, policy is not just a matter of single deeisions, however fully considered. A vast number of lesser policy decisions have accompanied these basic ones, and the way in which a basic policy is carried out in the end affects its substance. I have not tried to cover, for example, decisions on the balance of effort within South Viet-Nam, decisions on particular negotiating proposals, decision? on the pace and nature of the bombing of North Viet-Nam, or the subtle and difficult problem, over the years, of United States influence toward political progress in the South. I know full well that these are areas in which many of yon undoubtedly hold strong views. I welcome discussion of them. The Le$son in lnvelvemenl What, then, is the lesson in involvement"? Is it that we have baen trapped into a difn-Cult situation by a series of lesser decisions taken with no clear view of their implications? Is it that we should never have become engaged in Southeast Asia ? Is it that we should never have attempted to support South Viet-Nam ? Is it that, having supported South VietNam in certain respects (including a treaty) and having become deeply engaged in Southeast Asia, v.e should nonetheless have decided or should now decideto limit the actions we take or even to withdraw entirely? Thc first question seems to me both separate anil dlficiilt. At son? point in the history I have recited we bccame committee, deliberately and by formal constitutional process, to thc support of the freedom of South Viet-Nam from external interference. That commitment included a strong treaty obligation, and that is a clear part of the story. But what is perhaps more to thc point is that great powers must face two central points (a) As Irving Kristol has pointer! out in his . recent article in Foreign Affairs, the very deGni-tion of a great power is that not only its actions but the cases in which it declines to act have major Consequences. At every stage in the Viet-Nam story, it has seemed clear to the leaders of this country that not to act would have the gravest effects. This is the way that successive choices have appeared to four successive Presidents. (b) The second point that n great power cau-not escape is that its actions in themselves affect the stakes. When great powers commit themselves, by treaty and by a total course of conduct extending over many years, an clement of reliance conics into being, both within the area and within other areas in which commitments have also been undertaken. Yet. all this beinc said, I do not think one can Conclude that because we said or did a, v. e must necessarily say or do bin an bld phrase of Bismarck's. So I, for one, do not believe that the "lesson in involvement is that we are the prisomers of history. Rather, I think we should be focusing on the Second, third, and fourth questions I have listed above. These are big questions, ancl if I have tried to do anything today it is to stress that the. matter has really bcen looked at for at least the last 13 years in this kind of larger iramc-work. Thc policies followed today are, as they muSt be, the policies of this administration. No one can say whether another administration would have done the same. What can bc said is that the underlying viewpoint and analysis of factors have been largely similar throughout the last 13 years, if not longer. This does not prove, of course, that this analysis has been correct. Thc United States has no divine dispensation from error, and thc most that your leaders at any time can do is to exert the best human judgment and moral sense of which they are capable. I. for one, am convinced, that this has been done at all stages. 73 .     LCX 1 C J Special to 1 h N'tw Yori Tints UNITED NATIONS, N, Y., Sept. 21 following is the. text of a speech to General Assembly delivered today Arthur J. Goldberg, United States chief representative Today, as every year at this time, We open a new chapter in the history of the United Nations. Ve open on a hopeful note with your Corneliu Man-escu of Rumania election as President, for you are not only known and re-spected by your coileagues throughout the world as an able and distinguished diplomatist; you also have the distinc-tion of being the first representative of a country of Eastern Europe to be dccl-ed to tills high office. Ve of the Unit'd States velconr.- this deveiopmc.Tt as onc furthes sign of the evolution which has been taking place in the relations among the states of Eastern Europe and of oth-er parts of thc world. May at! members take this new stcp as a reminder of ths truth which a modern-Danish sags has compressed into .these words "Coexistence or no existence." Ve congratulate you, Mr. President, and pledge to you our cooperation in thc discharge ol your difficult and im-portant office. I take this occasion also to pay tribute to your distinguished predecessor, the President of thc Twenty-First Ses-u, Ambassador Pazhwak of Afglianis- . We share the admiration oi al! egations for the resourcefulness and patience with which he guided us through more meetings cf the General Assembly than have been presided over by any other man in thc history of this organization. This annual general debate serves the. Important purpose, of allowing each member to Jay before the entire As-sembly, at the outset of our ssssipn, its major concerns in thc international sphere. I Shall not attempt to touch on ail the issues on the agenda to which my country attaches importance. This Statement will concentrate on certain is- sues which, in our view, are of transcendent significance to world peace. The Conflict in Vietnam First among these is the continued tragic conflict in vietnam. For the entire Community of nations, the search for peace in Vietnam remains a matter of the first priority, for peace in Vietnam must and should be our major concern. Indeed, pursuant to its Charter, the United Nations has thc most explicit right and duty to concern itself vih this.qucstion, as it dm. with any breach of or threat to the peace anywhere in tirn world. Holding this conviction as v.c do, my err.ment continues to seel thcac-. participation ot the Uniter Nations in the quest for peace in Vietnam-member and every orgv o; the Unted Nations, this Assembly included-shares the Charter obligation of lending its A------------ '  ' weight and inftuenCO to help re.olvc disputes and conflicts between nations by pcaccful means. Today, despite part cs-appointments, I reiterate cur ?ppe?.I to all members of the United Nations, in-dividually and collective!!', to accept that obligation to use their influence to hclp bring the victnam conflict to an end by peaceful means. Thc distinguished delegates who p?.r-ticipate in this debate will undoubtedly make observations and offer scr seRics as to how this can be brought about. My delegation will listen to them with close attention and respect As our contribution to the Assembly's dtsCUSsion of this issue, let me state as precisely as possib'.e thc views and ideas o' my Government. Our basic view is one which, T am sure, is shared by the great majority of this zissembty that this confilt can and should be ended by a political solution at the earliest possible Lima. A military solution is not the answer. For our part, wc do not seek to impose military solution on'KortH Vietnam er onTts adherents.By thc same token, in fidelity to a political solution,vv oilnntpermt North.viatnani andjts adhere ntstojm-pose a military solution upon South Vietnam. Procedures for a Solution The question then naturally arises By what procedure can a political solution be reached? Qne well-tested way is the conference table. We are prepared to follow this path at any tims to go to the conference table in Geneva or any other suitable place. There is a second way to pursue a political settlement through private negotiations or discussions. Ths United States stands ready to take this route also and, in so doing, to give assurances that the confidence and privacy of such negotiations or discussions would be fully respected by our Gbvem-ment. It may be that negotiations or discus-sions might be preceded er facilitated by mutual military restraint, by the scat-ing down cf the conflict, by ce-escalation either with or without a formal ceasefire. This route, too, we are prepared to follow. There is, on the other hand, the dan-ger that the -.flict nry ccntinue until onc side finds the burden of war too exhausting or too costly, and that the fighting will only gradually end, without negotiations and without an agreed settlement. Certainly this is a grim prospect, for it would mean prolonged conflict and t.-aOdy. It is in essence a military solution, and it is not one we seek. Ve earnestly hope that it is not the ccurss in which our adversaries will persist-In any event, there will be no slackening in our resolve to l.Fp South Vietnam cefer.d its rlgnt to determine its own future by peaceful means and free from external force. 74 ---- --------- ------- Committed as we are to a political solution through discussions or nego-tiations, vzs regret that, despite many efforts. North victnam and its adherents Have not yet agreed to this objective. But we shall continue in our et-forts; and we hope that what we ssy today may help to bring nearer the time when the two sides will sit down together. The Attitude of Hanoi It is said by some that Hanoi will agree to bOgin negotiations it' the United States ceaaes thc bombing of North vietnamthat this bombing is the sole obstacle to negotiations. I would note that in its public statements Hanoi has merely indicated that there could' be negotiations if the bombing stopped. True, some governmentsas well as our distinguished SecretaryGeneral and other individuals have expressed their belief or assumption that negotiations "would-' begin, perhapj soon, if the bombings were stopped. V.'e have given these expressons of belief our most careful attention. But naSuch third E2tt J Bin dlrs ho? ?ove r nmeats'watch are among Hanoi's closest f r Fcnl Ico n v. authorit?.tive nit-smge from Hanoi that there would in i'?.cCF.e tuidHstpnsf the bombing. wsre stormed. we have sought such a message'directly from Hanoi without success. On its part, the United States would be gl?d to consider and discuss any proposal that would lead promptly to productive discussions that might bring about peace to the area. We do not, however, conceive it to be unreasonable for us to seek enlight-tenment on this important question Does North Vietnam conceive that the cessation of bombing would or. should lead to any other results than meaningful negotiations or discussions under circumstances which would not disadvantage either side? Moreover, we believe ve also have a right to address Ourselves to those governments which support Hanois cause and which have stated to us their  beliefs about Hanoi's intentions a nd to fit of put this Question to them If the United St ecs were to'take Tne ;t step and order a prior cessation the bombing, what would they then do or refrain from doin. and how would they then use their influence and power, in order to move the Viet-nam conflict promntIy toward a peace- ful resolution? Constructive answers ould aid in the s o these ques-irch for peace tions In the minds of some, there is a fur-necc namely, to articulate more pre the princip1 honor able 'RtIemdin'c's 06' meeting ims .. time principles envisaged by my Gov-ernment in as precise a manner as is possib! prior to negotiations and without in any way pre-conditioning or prejudicing such negotiations  NND 63316,  It is widely' accepted that the Geneva Agreem-l-rits of 1954 and 1962 should constitute the basis for settlement Vie agree. In our view, this entails 1 A complete cease-fire and dimn-iemeat by all armed personneTTn irQ Sciihvi  a specinedtate' SuiR"action was called fury tfie' Geneva Agreements. 2. No military forces, armed person-nel dobasesJo'Ce mamtaned,7trN'onh CfS6uth Vietnam except those under the control of the respective governments. This would mean withdrawing or demobilizing all other troops, with-drawing external military and related personnel introduced from outside South vietnam, and ths evacuation of mili-tary bases, as soon as possible under an agreed tfmasc!muu!e. This too was contemplated uncfeFtSe' Geneva Agree-ments. 3. Full respect for the international frontiers of thc states bordering on North and South Vietnam, as well as for the demarcation line and demilitar-ized zone between North and South Vietnam. This too was called for by tile Geneva Agreements. 4. Peaceful settlement by the people in both North and South vietnam of the question, of reumfieation, without foreign interference. This too was called for by th a G c n e va Agrc em e n is. 5. Finally, supervision of all the fore-going b5'.a-rtpd.uppnir3ern2tkr.3lma-.ohineryv This too was called for by the Geneva Agreements.  thus summarizing the central elements of the Geneva Agreements, I note tnaC as evidenced it the communique issued at Manila last October 25, the Government of South vietnam holds sun-iiar views. We make this authoritative statement, Mr. President, in tha hope that a settlement can be reached by reaffirming the principals of the Gsneva Agreement and by making use of the machinery created by those agreements including in par-ticular a reconvened Geneva Conference in which all concerned parties can appropriately participate. An Addition?.! Question And we suggest that a further question is in order Does North vietnam agree that tbe. .foregoing paints are a correct interpretation of the Geneva Agreements to which it professcdIy subscribes? To this question let me append this plain statement about the alms oi tie United States toward North vietnam. The United States has no designs on the territory of North vietnam we co not seek to overthrow its government, whatever its ideology; and ve are fuby prepared to respect its sovereignty and territorial integrity' and to enter into specific undertakings to that end- By the same token, it remains our view that the people of South. Vietnam should have the rijItt to work out their own. political futuie by peaceful mc-ar.5, in accordance tvith the principle ci se't-determination, and without externa! in- tcrrercnce; and that this right too should be respected by all.  Ard it is our further view thaP 31 So'.i'.it Vietm-mese vIio are v.ll'irc to parucipaU t-mfulTy ihTni political ;fe orsabm vl should ito e t- cTV.n .c as firsi-cIiss citizen.. vMttf i-H rtJlts Tn "everyscnsiV.c do no clm-Cstcif tbit' any' segment cf the South Vietnamese people should ba excluded from such peaceful participation. We v.-pu1dconsiorit. altogether v, and proper., if ..this yculd. .rFm'diT t'Ccb; stacle to rNace, that sparopriue ?.tsur-ancOs or. this milter be cor.ndired in co r; n 2 c t io n VI h' a jEft i y a l. sRH C m E it should be noted in this canneetion that the Government of Su.th Vietnam has stated t'ct it has "no desire to threaten or harm the people of the North; that it seeks Only to'resolve its political problems without external in-terfcrence; and that it is prepared for reconciliation of all elements in the so-ciety." It is also note-worthy that the people of South Vietnam have just con-cluded a peaceful election under a ne'.',' constitution, and have made progress in the democratic procesS. Let me add that my Government remains willing, and indeed has already begun, to make a major commitment of resources in a multilateral cooperative effort to accelerate in all of Southeast Asia the bsaetits of economic develop-irent so sorely needed there. When the conflict is ended and peace is restored, we would hope to see North Vietnam included in that effort. Constructive Replies Urged In file interest of progress along this road to peace, we earnestly hops that constructive answers to the questions we have raised will soon be forthcoming. We are al I too conscious that the present reality' is one of grim and harsh conflict already traglcatly and unduly prolonged. Surely if there is any contribution that diplomacy, whether bilateral or multilateral, can make to hasten tha end of this conflict, none in this Assembly can in good conscience spare any effort' or any' labor to make that cor.-tribution no matter how frustrating past efforts may have been, or how many new beginnings may be required. Ve of the United States, for our part, stand ready to make that effort and to persist in trying to overcome all ob-stacles to a settlement The President of ths United States, speaking specificalIy of vietnam, has said ' We Americans know the nature cf a fair bargain; none need fear negotiating with us. In the flexible spirit of that statement, and Speaking for the United States Government I affirm yHth-out reservation the willingnesi of the United States to seek and find a politi-cal solution cf the conflict in Vietnam. I turn now to the Middle East, a second area of conflict which is both traric in itself and dangerous to ths peace of the world. 75 The views of the United states on the requirements of peace in the Middle East have been set forth by President Jobnson, notably in his statement of June 19 which remains our policy. In that statement my Government appealed to all the parties to adopt r.o rigid view on tb.e method cf bringing peace to ths area. Rattier, we have emphasized throughout that there is sometltins more basic than methods the simple will to peace. There must be present cn both sides an affirmative will to resolve the issues, not through tha dictation of terms by either sids, but through a process of mutual accommodation in which nobody's vital interests are in-jured In short, both sides must have the v.iII to work out a political soIutfcn; both must be committed  the peace and no appropriate method, such as good o.i'iccs or mediation, should be excluded. EmCrgency Sessions work In candor it must be said that such a will to peace was not manifest in the recent emergency session of the Asscm-bly. It is greatly to be hopcd that, after sober reflection by all concerned, a new stid better moad will emerge a mood cf reconciliation and magnanimity. Surely the purposes cf peace cannot be served if thc right of a member state to its national life is not accepted and respected by its neighbors nor if mili-. tary success blinds a member state to the fact that its neighbors have rights and intercsts cf their own. In realism, it is perhaps not to be expected that reconciliation and magnanimity will appear overnight; but surely enmity must at hast give way to toler-ance and to ths will to live together in peace. Cnee that will is manifest, the terms of settlement can be evolved. Thc principles which my Government believes can bring place to the region are these Cach nation in the area must accept the right of others to live. The least that this requires is that all should renounce any state or claim of belligerency, which as long ago as 1951 was found by the Security Council to be incon-sistent vith peace. Troops must be withdrawn and withdrawn in a context of pcace. For some parties cannot be left free to as-sert the rights of war while others are called upon to abide by the rules of peaCe. dhere must be justice for the refugees. Ths nations of the area must address themselves at last, with new en-ergy and naw determination to succeed, to the plight of those who have been rendered homeless or displaced by wars and conflicts of the past, both distant and recent. ?Free and innocent passage through international waterways must be a;-sured for all nations. Ore of the lessons of tba recent conflict is that maritime rights must be respected. CIhe wasteful and destructive arms race in tlie region must be curbed, thereby making more resources available for economic development.      dhe status cf Jerusalem must not be decided unilaterally but in consultation vth all concerned, and in recognition e historic interest cf the three great ..gions in the Holy Places. tThe political independence and territorial integrity ofall states in the area must be respected. e Boundaries must be accepted and other arrangements made, Superseding temporary and often violated armistice lines, so as to afford security to alI parties against terror, destruction and war. These are important general principles on which, we believe, rc$ts the peace b' the area, white the main re-sponsibiIily lies with the parties, the United Nations ami every member state, including my own country, must help in the search for peace. For it is in the highest international interest, as well as in the national interests cf the parties, that peace should be achieved as soon as possible. i As fur my own country., bur most cherished wish for ths Middle East has long been an age of paace in which we could enjoy good relations with every .nation of that region. In such a climate of peace there is much that we could do, and would bs glad to do, in coopsra-tion with o.ther members ana with the gifted people of the region itself. Rc-gional economic development; the full hatiJitation-of the refugees; the de-iting of water and the restoration of Lie desert to human use these, and not war or armaments, are the works to which my country, and I am sure many both'in and outside the Middle East, would prefer to devote our energies, I turn now to a third momentous problem the search for reliable pro-grams of international disarmament and arms control, particularly in the field pt nuclear weapons. Step-by-step progress in this field, Which seemed cut of reach for so many years, has more recently become a real-ity. Significant limitations regarding nu-clear weapons have been accepted by the nuclear powers in the Antarctic Treaty' of 1959; in ths Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1S63; and only last year in the Outer Space Treaty. These successive steps have cncour-aged us to continue to tackle one of the most basic aspects of the nuclear dilemma the threat of the spread ot nuclear weapons to more and. more na-tions. This poses one of the gravest dangers to peace and, indeed, to the survival of mankind. The Ioncr this problem remains, Ins graver the danger Becomes. My Government has long been very much alive to this d?.njer. In response " it we have given the highest priority the 1S-Nation Disarmament Commit-tec to the objective c a non-prolifera. fion treaty. Last month tbi. Icng effort culminated in the simultaneous tabling by the Unit-cd State and tna Soviet Union of identical drafts of a non-proliferation trea- ty guard drafts complete ia all except its safeprovisions. The texts of these will be available in document form to all members of the General As-semblv. vcmpiec Problems Remain Complex problems still remain. But we are bopeItl that a complete treaty draft, including a generally acceptable safeguard provision, will be presented to this session in time to allow for con-sideration and action by the Assembly, under whose general direction and guidance this treaty is being negotiated'. The presentation of such a completed draft will, of course, not be the end of the process. Thme vail remain the un-dcrstandable desire of certain non-nu-clear countries for assurances against nuclear blackmail. 1 he Assembly, in ad-dition to endorsing the treaty as we hope it will, can make a significant contribution to the treaty's objective ot non-proliferation by helping to develop a solution to this related probIem. Ve fully understand that the drafts which have been tabled in Geneva are far toa important to admit of hurried consideration by prospective signatories. But neither does this urgent matter ad-mi t of procrastination. All concerned powers, nuclear and non-nuclear alike, should press forward with al! practical speed to the conclusion of a final treaty. Indeed, the General Assembly itself spoke to all of us last year when it unanimously declared in Resolution 2149 (XXI) First, that states taie alt necessary steps to facilitate and achieve at the earliest possible time the conclusion of a non-proliferation treaty; and Second, that all states refrain from any actions conducive to proliferation or which might hamper the conclusion of an agreement. Mr. President, our preoccupation with the non-proliferation treaty has not di-minishOd my Governments concern over other major problems in the arms con-trol field. High on the list of these problems is the growing arsenal of stra-tegic Offensive and defensive missiles. Some time ago we expressed to the So-viet Union .our interest in an understanding which would limit the deploy-rnent of such missiles. In the interim, we in the United States have been obliged to review carefully our strategic position. Our conclusion from this review was that our security, including particularly security against the threat of a missile attack by Mainland China, required us to embark upon the construction o' a limited anti-batIis-tic missile system and I emphasize the word limited. No nation, nuclear or non-nuclear,  should feel that its security is endan gered by' this decision. On the contrary,' to the extent that the United States will be better able to meet its international defensive responsibiIities, and to respond to appeals from states threatened by nuclear blackmail, the present safety of many other countries rnay in fact be enhanced. , No Illusions on MisslIeS However, we have no illusions that the construction end deployment of missiles of any kind is the preferred road to security. It is not. The events which led to our decision simply underscore the urgent importance of pursuing nego-tiations on ?. limitation of strategic of-fensive and defensive missiles. Despite our lack of success thus far, the United StateS remains ready to open talks on this subject at any timeMr. President, these developments once again demonstrate the urgent need not only for a non-proliferation treaty, but for all the necessary' steps toward general and complete disarmament. Let no one imagine that the building or ac-quisition of a nuclear bomb buys cheap security. True security for all powers, nuclear and non-nuclear alike, lies in progress on the entire range of arms control and disarmament measures including contro! of the strategic arms race, ?. verifiable comprehensive test ban, and a cut-off of production of fis- . sionable materials tor weapons purposes. The sum or such acts win help to bui'd a more secure world for all. Ml-. President, the fourth great problem which I wish to discuss is that of assuring self-determination and full nationhood to all peoples who still live in colonial subjection. Our Assembly agenda reminds us that the work of ending the colonial age is far from finished. In fact, the hardsst problems have remained until the last. This is tru? above all in the southern portion of the African continent, where white minorities have become deeply en-trenched in their dominion over black majorities. In much or this area we see not one evil but two evils which, under one guise or another, go hand in band colonialism and that particularly cruel offense against human rights, racial discrimination. The opposition of the United States to these twln evits draws strength from two of the deepest elements in our own national life our historic stand as an anticolonial power and our continuing struggle against racial injustice among . our own people. 76 .       My country, founded on the pronosi-tion that all men are created equal' and have equal rights before the law and Currently engaged in a vigorous nation-wide program to make Hue equality- real for all its citizens cannot and will not adopt a doubic Standard of what is "happening in the soutnera parr ar Aiuca. To those who arc impatient for re-dress of grievances we shall show that we sympathize with them and support their objectives, even though we may not always agree on the Specific steps to be taken by the international community. To those who, on the other hand, re-sist all change, we shall continue to insist that the way to preserve peace is not the submergence of legitimate griev- ances, but their timely redress. And tve shall unceasingly bring borne to them Americas profound conviction that apartheidlike every other form of white supremacyis, as my predecessor Ad lai Stevenson said, "racist in its origins, arrogant in its implementation; and, in its consequences, potentially dangerous for all. Mr. President, during the comingthree months the General Assembly will ad-dress itself not only to the questions we have discussed in this statement but to a vast range of matters affecting the peace ' and welfare of mankind, both now and in die long future. My delegation will seek to participate constructively in the Assembly's many concerns and on a numbcr of topics of particular interest we shall present proposals of our own. The United States turns to these tasks in a mood of sober determination. Our distinguished Secretary General, in the introduction to his annua! report, has made clear his view that this has not been a good year for the United Nations; and we agree with that assessment. The fault lies not in the organiza-tion itseIf but in ourselves, its members; and it is to our own policies that we must aIl look if we desire a better fu-ture. In serving the cause of a just and peaceful world, we are not permitted the luxury' of being easily discouraged. Indeed, the most forbidding obnacies are precisely thosa which should call forth our most persistent' efforts. Nor should we look for any alternative to ths Unit-ed Nations, for there is none. Year in and year Out, through all the difficulties that may arise, we must strive to be true, both in vord and deed, to the perma-nent pledge ot peace and justice which we, as merdbers, have made to the United Nations and to one another. As this Twenty-second General Assembly opens, the United States once again solemnly reaffirms its devotion to that pledge.  ..      J Week Ending Friday, October <5, 1967 I VIETNAM The Presidents Remarks in San .1 ntonio Before the National Legislative Conference. September 29, 1907 Speaker Barnes, Governor Hughes, Governor Smith, Congressman Hazen, Representative Graham, most distinguished legislators, ladies and gentlemen I deeply appreciate this opportunity to appear before an organiza-tion whose members contribute every day such important work to the public affairs of our State and of our country. This evening I came hcre to speak to you about Vietnam. I do not have to tell you that our people arc profoundly concerned about that st juggle. There arc passionate convictions about the wisest course for our Nation to follow. There arc many sincere and patriotic Americans who ' harbor doubts about sustaining the commitment that three Presidents and a half a milIion of our young men have made. Doubt and debate arc enlarged because the problems of Vietnam are quitc complex. They arc a mixture of political turmoil of poverty of religious and factional strifeof ancicnt servitude and modem longing for freedom. Victnam is all of thcse things. Vietnam is also the sccnc of a powerful aggression that is spurred by an appetite for conquest. It is the arenawhere Communist expansionism is most aggressively at work in the world todaywhere it is crossing international frontiers in violation of international agreements; where it is killing and kidnaping; where it is ruthlessly attempting to bend free pcoplc to its will. Into this mixture of subversion and war, of terror and hope, America has enteredwith its material power and with its moral commitment. Why? Why should three Presidents and the elected representatives of our pcopIc have chosen to defend this Asian nation more than 10,000 miles from American shores? We cherish frcedomyes. We cherish self-determination for all peopleyes. We abhor the political rnurdcr of any state by another, and the bodily murder of any people by gangsters of whatever ideology. And for 27 yearssince the days of lend-leascwc have sought to strengthen free people against domination by aggressive foreign powers    V MONDAY, OCTO3ES 9, 1957 But the kcy to all wc have done is really our own Security. At times of crisisbefore asking Americans to fight and dic to resist aggression in a foreign land-every American President has finally had to answer this question Is the aggression a threatnot only to thc immediate victimbut to the United States of America and to thc peace and security of thc entire world of which wc in America are a very vital part? That is thc question which Dwight Eisenhower and John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson had to answer in facing the issuc in Vietnam. That is thc question that thc Senate of the United States answered by a vote of 82 to I when it ratified and approved the SEATO treaty in 1955, and to which the Members of thc United States Congress responded in a resolution that it passed in 1964 by a vote of 501 to 2, the United States is. therefore, prepared, as thc President determines, to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member or protocol state of thc Southeast Asia Collective Defensc Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its frcedom. Those who telI us now that we should abandon our commitment that securing South Vietnam from armed domination is not worth thc price wc arc payingmust also answer this question. And thc test they must meet is this What would bc thc consequence of letting armed aggression against South Vietnam succeed? What would follow in thc time ahead? What kind of world are they prepared to live in 5 months or 5 years from tonight? For those who have borne thc responsibility for decision during these past 10 years, the stakes to us have seemed clearand have seemed high. President Dwight Eisenhower said in 1959. "Strategically, South Vietnams capture by thc Communists would bring their power several hundred miles into a hitherto free region. Thc remaining countries in Southeast Asia would bc menaced bv a m-cat Hank-ing movement. Thc freedom of 12 million people would bc lost immedi-ately, and that of 150 million in adjacent lands would bc seriously endangered. Thc loss of South Vietnam would set in motion a crumbling process that could, as it progressed, have grave consequences for us and for frecdorn. ..And President John-F. Kennedy said in 1962 . Withdrawal in thc case of Vietnam and thc case of Thailand might mean a collapse of the entire area. A year later, he reaffirmed that "We are not going to withdraw from that effort. In my opinion, for us to withdraw from that cfEort would mean a collapse not only of South Vietnam; but Southeast Asia. So we arc going to stay there, said President Kennedy. This js not stmpu an American viewpoint, I would have you Icmsla-tive loaders knows I am going to call thc roll now- of those who live in that part of thc world, in thc great arc of Asian and Pacific nations.and who bear thc responsibility for leading their people, and the responsibility for thc fate o! their people. 137 79 .   NND 633 16.  7EE'aY cOMHtATIQN OF FHEStD.NIIAL DOCUMsKrS The President of thc Philippines had this to say Vietnam is the focus of attention now. ... It may happen to Thailand or the Philippines, or anywhere, wherever there is misery, disease, ignoranceFor you to renounce your position of leadership in Asia is to allow thc Red Chinese to gobble up all of Asia. Thc Foreign Minister of Thailand said (Thc American) decision will go down in history as thc move that prevented thc world from having to Eace .another major conflagration. Thc Primc Minister of Australia said  We are there because whilc Communist aggrcssion pcrsists thc whole of Southeast Asia is threatened. President Park of Korea said For the fust timc in our history, w-c decided to dispatch our combat .troops overseas . because in our belief any aggression against thc Republic of Vietnam represented a direct and grave menace against the security and peace of free Asia, and therefore directly jcopardizcd the very security and freedom of our own pcople. Thc Primc Minister of Malaysia warned his peopIe that if thc  United States pulled out of South Vietnam, it would go to thc Communists, and after that, it would be only a matter of time until they moved against neighboring states. i Thc Prime Minister of New Zealand said "We can thank God that America at least regards aggression in Asia 1 with thc same concern as it rcgards aggrcssion in Europeand is prc-pared to back up its concern with action. The Prime Minister of Singapore said I fcel thc fatc of AsiaSouth and Southeast Asiawill be decided in thc ncxt few years by what happens out in Vietnam. I cannot tell you tonight as your Presidentwith certaintythat a Communist conquest of South Vietnam would be folIowed by a Communist conquest of Southcast Asia. But I do know there arc North Vietnamese troops in Laos. I do Enow that there arc North Vietnamese ' trained guerrillas tonight in northeast Thailand. I do know that there are Communist-supported guerrilla forces operating in Burma. And a Communist coup was barely averted in Indonesia, the fifth largest nation in the world. So your American President cannot tcll youwith certaintythat a Southcast Asia dominated by Communist power would bring a third world war much closer to terrible reality. One could hope that this would not be so. 1 But all that we have learned in this tragic century strongly suggests to me that it would be so. As President of thc United States, I am not prepared to gamble on thc chance that it is not so. I am not prcparcd to risk thc securityindeed, thc survivalof this American Nation on merc hope and wishful thinking. I am convinced that by seeing this struggle through now, we arc greatly reducing thc chances of a much larger war perhaps a nuclear war. I would rather stand in Vietnam, in our timc, and 80      Monday, octo3sr 9, 196? by meeting this danger now, and facing up to it, thereby reduce thc danger for our children and for our grandchildren. I want to turn now to thc struggle in Vietnam itscIf. There arc questions about this difficult war that must trouble every really thoughtful person. I am going to put some of thesc questions. And I am going to give you thc very best answers that I can give you. First, arc thc Vietnamesewith our help, and that of their other alliesreally making any progress? Is there a forward movement? Thc reports I see makc it clear that there is. Certainly there is a positive movc-ment toward constitutional govcrnmcnt. Thus far thc Victnamcsc havc met the political schedule that they laid down in January 1966. Thc pcoplc wantcd an elected, responsive government. They wanted it strongly enough to brave a vicious campaign of Communist terror and assassination to vote for it. It has been said that they killed more civilians in 4 weeks trying to keep them from voting before thc election than our American bombcrs havc kiIlcd in thc big cities of North Victnam in bombing military targets. On November 1, subject to the action, of course, of the Constituent Assembly, an clectcd government will be inaugurated and an elected Scnatc and Legislature will bc installed. Their responsibility is clear; To answer the dcsircs of thc South Vietnamese pcoplc for sclf-dctcrmination and for peace, for an attack on corruption, for economic development, and for social justice. There is progress in thc war itself, steady progress considering thc war that wc arc fighting; rather dramatic progress considering thc situation that actually prevailed when wc sent our troops there in 1965; when wc intervened to prevent the dismemberment of thc country by thc Viet-cong and thc North Victnamcsc. Thc campaigns of thc last year drove thc enemy from many of their major interior bases. The military victory almost within Hanois grasp in 1965 has now bcen denied them. Thc grip of thc Vietcong on thc pco-pIe is being broken.  Since our commitment of major forces in July 1965 the proportion of thc population living under Communist control has been reduced to well under 20 percent. Tonight the secure proportion of thc population ' has grown from about 45 percent to 65 percentand in the contested areas, thc tidc continues to run with usBut the struggle remains hard. The South Vietnamese havc suffered severely, as havc wcparticularly in the First Corps area in the north, where thc enemy has mounted his heaviest attacks, and where his lines of communication to North Victnam arc shortest. Our casualties in thc war have reached about 13,500 killed in action, and about 85,000 wounded. Of those 85,000 wounded, we thank God that 79,000 of thc 85,000 have been returned, or will return to duty shortly. Thanks to our  great American medical scicnce and the hclicopterI Enow there arc other questions on your minds, and on the minds . of many sincere, troubled Americans "Why not negotiate now? so many ask me. Thc answer is that we and our South Vietnamese allies . are wholly prepared to negotiate tonight. 81 .     1376 . ' WEEKLY CoMPILATIOn OF FSESlOtNTIAL 0OCUM.NU I am ready to talk with Ho Chi Minh, and othcr chicfs of state ' . conccrncd, tomorrow. .1 am rcady to havc Secretary Rusk mcct with their foreign minister tomorrow. I am rcady to send a trusted represcntative of America to any spot . on this earth to talk in public or private with a spokesman of Hanoi, Wc havc twice sought to havc thc issue of Vietnam dcak with by thc United Nationsand twicc Hanoi has refused. Our desire to negotiate peacethrough thc Unitcd Nations or outhas been made very, very clear to Hanoidirectly and many timcs through third parties. .; As wc have told Hanoi timc and timc and time again, thc heart of ' the mattcr really is this Thc United States is willing to stop all aerial and naval bombardment of North Victnam when this will lead promptly to productive discussions. We, of course, assume that while discussions proceed, North Victnam would not take advantage of thc bombing ccssation or limitationBut Hanoi has not accepted any of these proposals. t So it is by Hanois choiceand not ours, and not the rest of thc ' worldsthat thc war continues.. Why, in thc facc of military and political progrcss in thc South, and the burden of our bombing in thc North, do they insist and persist with thc war? From many sources thc answer is thc same. They still hopc that thc pcoplc of thc United Statcs will not see this struggle through to thc vcry end. As one Western diplomat reported to me only this weekhc had just been in HanoiThey believe their staying power is greater than ours and that they cant lose. A visitor from a Communist capital had this to say They expect thc war to bc long, and that thc Americans in thc cud will bc dcfeatcd by a breakdown in morale, fatiguc, and psycho-locical factors. Thc Premier of North Victnam said as far back as 1962 . "Americans do not like long,-inconclusive warThus we are sure to win in the end. .- .' Are the North Vietnamese right about us? I think not. No. I think they are wrong. I think it is the common . failing of totalitarian regimes, that they cannot really understand the nature of our democracy  Thcy mistake dissent for disloyalty;  . They mistake restlessness for a rejection of policy; . They mistake a few committees for a country; . -They misjudge individual speeches for public policy. They are no better suited to judge the strength and perseverance of . America than the Nazi and thc Stalinist propagandists were able to judge it. It is a tragedy that they must discover these qualities in the American peopIe, and discovcr them through a bloody war. ,      Monday, octosm 9, 1967 13?; And, soon or latc, they will discover them. In thc meantime, it shall bc our policy to continue to seek ncgotia-tionsconfident that reason will somc day prevail; that Hanoi will rcalizc that it just can never win; that it will turn away from fighting and start building for its own people. Since Work! War II, this Nation has met and lias mastered many challengeschallenges in Grcccc and Turkey, in Berlin, in Korea, in Cuba.' . Wc mct them bccausc brave men were willing to risk their lives for their nations security. And braver men havc ncvcr Iived than those who carry our colors in Victnam at this very hour. The price of these efforts, of course, has been heavy. Put thc price of not having made them at all, not having seen them through, in my judgment would have been vastly greater. Our goal has been thc samein Europe, in Asia, in our own hemi-sphcre. It has bccnand it is nowpeace. And peace cannot bc sccurcd by wishes; pcacc cannot bc preserved by noble words and pure intentions. Enduring pcacc, Franklin D. Rooscvclt said, cannot be bought at thc cost of other pcoplcs freedom. Thc latc President Kennedy put it prccisely in November 1951, when he said We arc neither warmongcrs nor appeasers, neither hard nor soft. Wc arc Americans determined to defend thc frontiers of freedom by an honorable peace if peace is possible but by arms if arms are used against usThc true peace-keepers in thc world tonight are not those who urge us to retire from thc field in Victnamwho tell us to try to find thc quickest, cheapest exit from that tormented Iand, no matter what thc consequences to us may bc. The true peace-keepers arc those men who stand out there on thc DMZ at this vcry hour, taking thc worst that the enemy can give. Thc true peace-keepers arc the soldicrs who arc breaking the terrorists grip around thc villages of Victnamthc civilians who arc bringing medical care and food and education to people who have already suffered a generation of warAnd so I report to you that wc arc going to continue to press forward. Two things wc must do. Two things wc shall do. First, we must not mislead our enemy. Let him not think that debate and dissent will produce wavering and withdrawal For I can assure you they wont. Let him not think that protests will produce surrender. Be-causc they wont. Let him not think that he will wait us out. For he wontSccond, wc will provide all that our brave- men require to do thc job that must be done. And that job is going to bc done.These gallant men have our prayershave our thankshavc our heart-felt praiseand our deepest gratitude. Let thc world know that the keepers of peace wilI endure through every trialand that with thc full backing of their countrymen, they arc going to prevail. '  note The President spoke at 834 p.m., c.d.t., at the Villita Assembly Hall in San Antonio, Texas. The speech was broadcast nationally.  , The NationaI Legislative Conference is an operation of the Council of State Governments with headquarters in Atlanta, Ga. The group induded approximately   , .2,000delegates to the Conference. 3 .     at SUBMISSiON OF THE YIET.XA3I CONFLICT TO THEUNITED NATIONS i thuksday, November 2, 19S7 United States Senate, COMMITTEE 0X FOREIGN RELATIONS, Washington, D.C. The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1005 a.tn., in room 4221, New Senate OmCC Building, Senator J. W. Fulbright (chairman) prcoiding. Present Senators Fulbright, Sparkman, Mansfield, Morse, Gore, LaiiSche, Symington, Pell, McCarthy, and Aiken. Thc Chairman. Thc committee will come to order. We meet this morning to continue a scries of hearings on the role that the United Nations should play in settlement of the Vietnam conflict. Thc committee is considering two resolutionS covering tbc question of submitting the Vietnam war to the United Nations Security Council. Both Senate Concurrent Resolution 44, introduced by the diStinguiShed Senator from Oregon, Senator Morse, and Senate Rcsolution ISO, introduced by the senior Senator from Montana, Mr. ManSfield, with 57 cosponsors, are being Considered by the coin-, inittec. ... ' We arc very happy indeed this mornino to welcome the R epreSen ta-tive of the United States to the United Nations, Ambassador Arthur Goldberg. Mr. Ambassador, will you procCcd? STATEMENT OF HON. ARTHUR J. GOLDBERG, U.S. REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS, ACCOMPANIED BY JOSEPH J. SISCO, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION AFFAIRS Ambassador Goldberg. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and members of this committee. I should like to say I am accompanied here today by Mr. Joseph Sisco, the able and 'dedicated Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs. Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, I appreciate very much your invitation to appear before this committee and to give testimony in public session on the important subject of the responsibility of the United Nations in the search for peace in Victnam. This is the. grara-men of Senate Concurrent Resolution 44 introduced by Senator Morse, and of Senate Resolution 1S0 introduced by Senator Mansfield and many other Senators. I should like also, Mr. Chairman, to express my appreciation to the committee which had scheduled me to appear last week to defer my appearance which was impossible at that time because of a meeting 84      SUBMIT VIETNAM CONFLICT T0 UNITED NATIONS .he Security Council and other consultations on the Middle Eastern < rlsis at the U.X. I should like also to thank Dr. Marcy who was so Wind as to arrange for this day which was more convenient. At thc very outset let me say that I agree completely with the concept of the responsibility of the United Nations which underlies both resolutions. In preparing my testimony I have taken note of Senator Morse's comment in the hearings before this committee on October 20, referring to Senator Mansfield's resolution and I quote Senator Morse, who said in part; I think it probably would be thc most appropriate type of resolution tu send to the President, for, after all, this ought to be a teamwork play. I need scarcely add at this time that the Senator made tt very dear this was without prejudice to his own views in the matter. It is my considered view as the U.S. Representative to the United Nations that thc adoption of Senator Mansfields resolution at this time will support the cJoiIs 1. have been making at the United Nations at thc direction of the PreSident to enlist thc Security Council in the search for peaCG in Vietnam. U.K. RESPOXSIBtLITY UNDER THE CHARTER Any analysts of thc problem ofU.N. involvement in Vietnam must start with the United Nations Charter. Under the chat ter, the United Nations and its members have a specific obligation to cooperate in the maintenance of international peace and security. This obligation is dearly set forth in the provisions of the charter, including Specifi'cully the following . Article 1, paragraph 1, which slates thc fust purpose of thc United Nations as To maintain international peace and secarity, and to that end to take effective collective measures for th.? prevention and removal of threats to the p'sice, and for thc suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, aud in conformity with the- principles of justice mid international lav.-, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace. Article 2, paragraph 3. which includes among the principles binding upon all members the following All members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means iti such a manner that international peace and security, and justice are not endangered. Article 24, paragraph 1In order to ensure prompt and effective action by the United Nations, its Members confer on the Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and seCurity, and agree that in carrying out its duties under this responsibility the Security Council acts on their behalfArticle 25 Thc Members of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out thc decisions of the Security Council in accordance with the present Charter. And to those provisions should be added all of chapters VI and VII of the charter which confer broad powers on the Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security. Moreover, it is obvious that these powers and obligations of the United Nations apply to the situation in Southeast Asia in general and Vietnam in particular.      SUBMIT VIETNAM CONFLICT TO UNITED NATIONS In saying this I am mindful of the argument that is sometimes made, both inhmrI nut of the United Nations, that several of the principal parties the Deinucnttic Republic of Vietnam, the Republic of Vietnam, and the Peoples Republic of China -are not in the United Nations and that it is, therefore, not a suitable place to deal with the Vietnam question. The premise is. of course, n fact, but the concusion is incorrect. The charter explicitly provides for the responsibility and participation of nonmcrnbcrS; fur example Article 2, paragraph 6, provides The Organization Shall ensure that States which are not Members of the United ' Nations act in accordmc-.- with these principles so far as may be nccesAiry for the maintenance of intermitioual peace and security. And article 32 provides in part, and I again quote, that Any stnt'' which is not a nlember of the Tuitcd Nations, if it is a party to a dis-ptitc tmd'T consideration by the Security Council, shall be invited to partieipute, without vote, in the disciss.uon relating to the dispute. It is clear, therefore, Mr. Chairman, that the United Nations has a dutv to net for peace in Vietnam, and that the involvement of nontnembers is no obstacle to such action. The question therefore aches Why has such action not taken place? 1 believe it would be useful lo the Committee if I review briefly the record of our endeavors in the Security Council to obtain such action.    x ATTITUDE OF C0UXCIL SlEMBERS TOWARD DEBATE Ambassador Goldberg. It is important to note also, Mr. Chairman and gentleman, that the Soviet Union and Bulgaria refused throughout to even join in the consultations which Ambassador Matsui held among the Council members. The Soviet representative. Ambassador Fedorenko, sent a letter to the President of the Council stating his "strong objections to the procedure followed by Ambassador Matsui, and charging him with "steps that go beyond the limit of his confidence and violate the Security Councils rules of procedure and established practice." A similar letter was also sent by the Bulgarian representative. I need scarcely add, Mr. Chairman, that in our view and I think in the view of many members of the Cottnot! Ambassador MatSui acted quite properly in doing what he did and quite within his authority as President of the Council in reporting to the members of the Council the results of his conSultationa. My own cauvasS taken independently ol that of Ambassador Matsui confirmed his assessment that the members of the Council were gen-erally unwilling to proceed with a substantive discussion despite the strong and express preference of the United States that ve get on 86      SUBMIT VIETNAM C0XFLICT T0 UNITED NATIONS with the debate. J should also like to add we did have somewhat, of a ; substantive debate as happens in the U.N. even in the process of inscribing an item. I made a statement of a substantive Character in support of inscription because I could hardly avoid it, and other mem-bers spoke to the substance in dealing with the inscription matter as is apparent from the record you have kindly allowed me to file with the Committee. Indeed my canvass showed that this unwillingness to get on with the debate was found even among those members who had voted affirmatively on inscription in the hope that such a vote might sway the negative attitude of the Soviet Union and France in particular.     EFFORTS ON BEHALF Or THE ADMINISTRATION Now, Mr. Chairman, this is the record of my efforts on behalf of the Administration and the President to enlist the United Nations and speciEicalIy the Security Council in the search for peace in Vietnam. I must confesS that lice failure of these efforts has been my keenest disappointment and my greatest frustration during my service for our Government at the United Nations. I frankly Lad hoped for a much more constructive and positive role of the United Nations when I took on this assignment for our country. But, Mr. Chairman, in spite of these rebuff?, I do not intend, as long as I occupy my present post, to ' diminish my efforts in this cause. '  I repeat my conviction that Senator Mansfields resolution, if it is adopted by the Senate, as I hope and trust it will be, will support the efforts I tun making at the United Nations at- the Presidents direction. The resolution, as I understand it, is intended to GxpiCSS the sense of the Senate and apj.>ropriatck leaves the timing and circumstances of . action in the Security Council for Presidential determination. For my part, I promise this committee and th American people, in kecping with the spirit of the resolutionS that you are Considering, to persevere with all the resource at my command to the end that the Security Council may carry out its clear responsibilities under the charter with respect to Vietnam. I shall do so in the conviction that if there is any contribution that diplomacyin or put of the United Nationscan make to hasten the end of this conflict, none of us can in good Conscience spare any effort or any labor to make that contribu-tion-no matter how frustrating past efforts may have been, or how ' ' many new beginnings may be required. The admirable courage and perseverance of our men on the battlefield must be fully matched by our perseverance in seeking, through diplomacy, to find the common  ground on which a fair and honorable political settlement cart be built. I thank you very much, NU. Chairman. The Chairman; Thank you, Mr. Ambassador. I think that is an extraordinarily clear and very fine statement, and I think it does great credit to your representation of this country in the United Nations.  . ..  There are a few questions I want to go into quickly, much quicker than I would like, in order that other members may have an oppor-. tunity to put qucstionS. INTENTION TO RECOXVEXK GENEVA COXFERENCE May I ask regarding the current proposal that you have or expect tosubmit, which Calls for the convening of an international confCrcnCe for the purpose of establishing a permanent peace in Southeast Asia based upon the principles of the Gcneva Agreements.  87      SUBMIT VIETNAM CONFIJCT T0 tNtTED NATIONS i Js it proper to interpret that as meaning the same as the reconvening of the Geneve, conference under the cochairmanship of the United Kingdom and the V.S.S.R., with the same membership participating? Ambassador Golpbkeg. Yes, Mr. Chairman. It is intended to reaffirm our willingness to have that clone. It is also intended to .add a little more flexibility because there have been some indieationS from the other side that perhaps some other conference might be desirable. But we would be entirely willing, and we would be interpreting this clause to mean that the Geneva Conference, with the Same membership should be reconvened. The Chairman. On several occasions, the other side, the North Vietnamese and, I think, as one of your citations of the Chinese said, that that is the competent forum in which this matter should be settled; is that not correct? Ambassador Golduekg. There have been Some recent Statements particularly from China further qualifying their former position, and our formulation was intended to be more cnCompassing so as not to excludc nny type of international conference, but we believe the moot appropriate would be tho reconvening of the Geneva Conference aS you have saidThe Chairmax. And from time to time, the Soviet Union 1ms also stated that the conference was a proper forum; is that not correct? ArnbasSador Goldberg. That is correct., but the Soviet Union has not responded to our repeated invitation to them to join with the British in reconvening the conference. The Chaibman. I realize that. ; ? ' ; .  RECONVENING OF GENEVA CONFERENCE Let mo say, I certainly am sympathetic with your view that Hanoi has been very unrcSponSive to these offers and it is ouite beyond my comprehension as to why. I dont underStnnd their reluCtanCe or their refusal to do it except possibly they may interpret this move to mean the United Nations is going itself to undertake to deal with the substantive question. Now, this may be a point, I am not clear, I dont know, of course, whether or not that is their reason, but if that should be SO that they interpreted this aS a move on our part to use the U.N1 to solve the problem then they, not being a member have Some reason for it. Even so, I would not agree with their position at all. I think that it would bo perfeotly proper if they would agree to come and Submit the matter to the United NationsBut in any case, seeking to find some basis upon which we might get a reconvening of the Geneva conference, it has seemed to me that thiS point is very important. I confess that if this is the purpose, to reConvene the Geneva conference, I cannot possibly understand the attitude of the French Government or of the Soviet Government in TeftiSing to take the position in the Security Council that this would bea proper mode of procedure because you do not dea! with it . substantively. <  I think some of the Statements of the Sovicta and of the French that I have seen and some which you cite seem to indicate that they believe, too, that we are attempting to use the ScCurity Council itself to deal with the substantive question; is that correct? 88 .     ; SUBMIT VIETNAM C0NFLICT T0 UNITED NATiGNS Ambassador Goi.deehg. I shared your apprebenstons about this, Mr. Chairman, and in the inscription debate in 196G after liStenino-to the comments made by the Soviet Union and by France and having read some of these editorials which appeared at the time, 1 specifically addressed myself to that problem in the same light as you have just done, trying to make clear that while we believe, itnd had to believe under the charter, that the Security Council had competence, never-thcless, in light of what they are Saying about it, it was not our proposal th'.it the U.N. itself settle the matter, but rather, we were trying to get the great influence and prestige of the Security Council behind the reconvening of the Geneva conference, and I think the statement you macle today is a helpful statement. I endorse it completely, and I also am puzzled why, in light of their contention on the basis that the Geneva conference is the forum, why they cun possibly object to a Security Council resolution which supportS the reconvening of the forum which it is asserted by them is the appropriate forum. The Chairman. That is right. This really raises a question of then-good faith, in my mind. If they really are interested in being of assist-ancc in stopping this serious conflict, I am at a loss to understand why they would refuse to reconvene the conference if the members of the Security Council so recommend. That would particularly apply to France and the Soviet Union who have both on numerous OCcasions stated publicly that this was the way to proceed. ATTITUDE OF NONPERMANEXT -MEMBERS OF C0VNCIL Now, I am not aware of the prcviotiS Statements of some of the nonpermanent members of the Security Council. You dont have time, of course, to outline them, but in your consultations, I cant understand why they would not, at leaSt nine of them, agree to this. Do you think they understand this point? Ambassador GoLDnsttG. I think they must understand it, Mr. Chairman, and gentlemen. I have before me the statement I made, which is in your record, after the debate that we had in February of 1966, and I said thisI should like to read, if I may, just a paragraph or two., . Now I shall turn to some of the questions raised by members in the course of our discussion. I should like to deal with what was first pointed out by my friend, our former President, the Representative of France, whose wisdom I have learned to appreciate very much ana whose friendship I deeply value. The question he raisedis an important one and Kas been raised by otherS, the representative of Mali, the repreSentative of Uganda, and it has been adverted to by the repre-sentativc of Bulgaria and I think was mentioned also by our esteemed colleague, Nir. Fcdoreuko of the Soviet Union. Their point is this It has been pointed out by them that the Geneva conference at which all parties tc the confliet are represented, has been the international body which has in the past dealt with the problems Of Vietnam, and it lias been claimed that it still remains the appropriate body tO do so. The United States has no quarrel with this contention. fc have repeatedly stated that wc would welcome the rcconveniiig of the Geneva con-ference for this purpose. It has becn correctly pointed out that the purpose of our draft resolution is to assist in what thus far it has not L .m possible to realize, the reconvening of the Geneva Conference. That has not been possible to realize not because of any opposition on the part of the United States. Quite the contrary. Und r theSC circur "stances, therefore, the choice before the mTiub.-iS of the Security Council is not whether to deal with this problem in the Council or to deal with it. in Geneva, but whether to deal with it at all. The door to Geneva is at least for the time being closed and the question we have to decide is a pIain .     SUBMIT VIETNAM CONTLXCT TO UNITED NATiGNS mid simple one Do we wish also to close the door to the United Nations? what will the people of the world say if we do? . The ChaikmaN. You have made that very clear this morning, much clearer than it has ever been made before, although I think your speech in August went very far in this direction. I must say I thought it was an excellent speech and I am at a loss to understand why so many members of the Aembly have recently made speeches Critical of our country, and of the bombing in view of your speech. J cant believe they understand what we really mean. So I am par-ticuhuly pleased that you support this resolution of Senator Mansfield. I predict that if this is properly handled, and I have every confidence it will bo by you, that this v. ill make a great impreSsion up ,n a number of those people who have been critical. 1 dont see how they could object to this procedure. Senator Sparkman? Senator Sparkman". Mr. Chairman, let me say that I certainly endorse cvcrvthing the Chairman has said. I have boon very much impressed with your Statement, Ambassador Goldberg. It seems to me that you have gone into the matter most carefully and pointedly, and I dont sec much left to question you about. I am puzzled as is the Chan-man, about the attitude of many of theso countries, as to why they could not accept what seemS to be the clear responsibility of the Security Council under the charter of the United Nations to take some kind of action. It seems to me that you have probed in just about every direction that you can to find some action that they could agree to take.  AGREEMENT OX RECONVEXIXG GENEVA C0XFEREXCB Does the Geneva Conference have the power to reconvene itself? Ambassador GoLimKitc. Under the rules of the conference, the two coChairmcn, the Soviet Union and Great Britain, may reconvene the ConfcrenCC.  . Senator Sparkman. But it cannot be reconvened unleSS both chairmen agree to it? . .. Ambassador Goluberg. That is correct. Senator Svarkman. And So far" the chairmen have not agreed to do So? "  Ambassador Goldbeug. The British have repeatedly indicated their willingness to do So by public statements ancl bv private letters . to the other coclmimian as recently its in the Assembly of the United Nations last month Senator SvarkmaN. DoeS the Soviet representative give reasonS for his unwillingness to reconvene the Conference? Ambassador Goldbekg. Basically, if I were to interpret hiareaSons, his reasons are that Hanoi docs not want the conference reconvened. He always sayS that the Soviet Union does not want to, but ho always reads the statements made either by Hanoi or the NLF, and my interpretation is that that is the basis for the decision taken by the . Soviet Union. That is my interpretation, Mr. Chairman. Ho. also aSscrts that they arc unwilling, but that is my interpretation. ' Senator Sfarkmax. How many countlies constitute the Geneva Conference? ,      SUBMIT VIETNAM CONFLICT T0 UNITED NATIONS Ambassador Goldberg. The Geneva Conference, there are quite a number. The CiiAntMAN. Are you talking about the 1951 one. or the 1962. one? There- arc nine in the first; 1-1 in the second. Ambassador Goliuog. There arc a larger number.  Senator SPArkmax. Fourteen in the one that prevails at the present time. I believe you have put to them that we would be willing to proceed under either the 19-31 or the 1962 arrangement; is that right? Ambassador Goldbhkg. That is correct.. Although we do feel that if a conference were to be held it would be highly desirable to deal with both issues because it would be necessary to deal with peace in that part of the world, and would be highly desirable to deal with the problcmS in Laos, Cambodia, because they arc related problems, as well aS Vietnam. Senator Spaukman. But the membership is powerless to act in the abseiiCC of the agreement of the two chairmen. Ambassador Goldbkug. That is Correct, Senator Sparkman. Senator Spabkmax. Mr. Ambassador, 1 want to commend you for what I consider the excellent job that you have been doing for us in the United Nations and for your presentation here today. Ambassador Goldberg. Thank you. Senator SPARKMAN. That is alI, Mr. Chairman. = ' > MEMBERSHIP OF GENEVA CONFERENCES The ChairmaN. For the record, Mr. Ambassador, unless it is already in would you insert the membership of both Geneva conferences and also the present membership of the Security Council? Ambassador Goldbkrg Yes; I shall be very glad to do so' (The material referred to follows) ! 0 MEMBERSHIP OF Geneva CoXEBRENCES , !951 .. 1902 I. PARTICIPANTS Cambodia China (Communist)France . Laos United Kingdom United States U.S.S.R' Vietnam, State of (South) Vietnam, DcmOcratic Republic of (North) 1 Burma . Cambodia Canada China (Communist) ' France .  India  . Laos1 ' Poland Thailand United Kingdom . United States U.S.S.R'.Vietnam, Republic of (South) Vietnam, Democratic Republic of (North) 1 Popul.rly Known as Viet Minh. > Uuring the contnenc . there were three L.otitn representltive, invited to sit at the table with equal status one represattns the neutral Action, one repre citin the leftist bction, amt one representing the-rightist fiction. The U.S.S.K. looked upon the neutral pctlon cs reptes.ntlns the Royal Dio Government; the United States looked upon the rtthtist action is rep ninj the Roy.t Lao Government. The tonferenee ad-Jouruid prsiv. ;.! cvxiths to permit the three Cieta to uiitjnje their conlUctinT chims. TIiey Onisliy reached an a;. i.icnt (ia June of 1.O) to nt.W a govern-. at ot notIoull Ui'oa, and It jv tilts government which accepted the ajreements reached at the cornrence.     91 .     SUBM1T VIETNAM CONFLtCT 10 UNITED NATIONS PARTICIPATION IN FORMULATION OF U.S. VIETNAM WAK POLICY .1 have another question. You may answer it or not, just as you like. Did you or Mr. Sisco participate in formulating our governments Vietnamese policy in carrying out of the war? Ambassador Golpbki'.g. J would like to say this I am often talked to about these matter, but J do operate under the restrictions that are imposed by the United Nations Participation Act by Congress, which I think are appropriate restrictions. At the U.N. 1 State the viewpoint of the U.S. Government as determined by the President, and I have participated in numy meetings, however, on the subject of Vietnam. Senator Aikex. 1 notice in the last paragraph of your statement you say that you promise to persevere with all the resources at your Command to the encl that the the Secutity Council may carry out its clear responsibilities under the charter with respect to Vietnam. Now, the resources at your command would be whatever the President decides you should have? Ambassador Golpeef.g. That is correct, and I am confident that those resources will be available if the Senate secs fit to pasS this resolution.  Senator Aikex. Of course, I will Say this. It is entirely possible that the President and the Secretary of State might not see eye to eye on the degree of rcSourcea which you Should have. AmbaSsador Golpbekg. Well, I know only one way to use my rcSoitrceS and that is to use them fully. I dont know any other way to use them.     Senator Aiken. Yes, I am saying that. That is all, Mr. Chairman. The CnAIKMAX. Senator Mansfield? IAJIITATIONS APPLTCABLK TO TUF. UNITED NATIONS , Senator Mansfield. Mr. Ambassador, J want to congratulate you on an excellent statement. 1 think you have put the question in proper perspective before this Committee. I very much appreciate the colloquy . between you and the Chairman of this committee relative to the limitations which apply to the U.N., and a recognition of the fact that it is not the U.N. which will make the final decision but, let us hope, something like a reconvened Geneva conference. This resolution does not hand you any blank check, and I think that ought to be kept in mind. Nor docs it allow, if it is passed, any authority to the U.N. to dictate a pcace in Southeast Asia. MANSFJHLD RESOLUTION IS ADVISORY The pending, resolution is entirely advisory, at least the resolution .cosponsored by 5S Senators. It places the President in no straitjacket. It leaves the conduct of foreign policy on Vietnam where, in the end, only it can be, in the hands of the President. In rny view the adoption of this resolution would say to the President most respectfully, that the Senate hopes that he would sec the desirability of trying again to open the question of Vietnam to formal consideration by the U.N. Security Council. Furthermore, we would say to him that we think it is desirable to take timely nobe of the deep concern over Vietnam which has been expressed by more than .     SUBMIT VIETNAM CONFLICT TO UNITED NATIONS 100 nations during the current session of the General Assembly and try to convert these words of Concern into a U.N. action for peace. Wc would say further by the passage of this resolution, in effect, tlmt if a U.N. conLnbulion to peace is not forlhcoiumg it ought not ; to be because- this Nation lias been unwilling to act positively under the charter. On the contrary, we would ask the President to consider making  clear to the world that this Nation will submit the issues of Viet-nam to the form al procedures of the Security Council in an effort to . move the search, for solutions from the battlefield to the negotiating table. In sum, the Senate resolution would suggest to the President that he consider acting on the. premise that the U.N. could be a point of entry to the road to peace even if it is not the place where peace is ; negotiated in the end. The U.N. may not prove useful in this connection, but no one can I blame the President or this Nation of not acting in good faith to try to find out by an initiative involving votes who is willing to try for a just peace by this route and who is not willing. In my jueltrment, win, lose, or draw, this Nation has everything to gain and nothing to lose by taking that initiative. ' Thank you, Mr. Chairman The Chahcman. Senator Morse. ' COOPERATION IN settlement OF ViETNAll ISSUE Senator Mouse. Mi. Ambassador, I think you have made a power-ful statement this morning. My prediction is, in light of future develop-ments in Asia, it is going to be a historic one. I have in mind your views in regard to United Nations participation and settlement pf this war from the very beginning. I flunk 1 violate no confidence by saying, at your invitation, 1 went to your Supreme Court office three days after your nomination and prior to your confirmation and we talked about my views in regard to United Nations responsibilities. You will recall at the time of the steel Case we were down at the White House to-getlicr and the President asked us to talk about it further. I mention that only because I think many people do not know what the Presidents position was from the very beginning. There is no doubt that he has always welcomed appropriate United Nations participation and intervention in trying to seek a peace in Southeast Asia. And, as you point out this morning, as his Ambassador you have sought to serve that purpose on the part of the President It is true, as you point out in your statement, that I quickly endorsed the Mansfield resolution. In that record which you accurately quoted from, 1 pointed out I thought it was important that we build a bridge between the Congress and this Administration in trying to resolve some of these foreign policy differences. I think it is a great mistake when people don't want to cross those bridges. You have crossed one thia morning by appearing before this committee in a public hearing, as I ' think you should have clone, as you were always willing to do, and which I think is'in keeping with our whole system of representative government.    .  93 .     AIUUXISTKATION ATTITUPE T0WARP NEUTKALIZATJoN OF S0UTH VIETNAM Now, as far as neutralization, we have said that we do not as a matter of principle, nml 1 repeat here, do not, in any way oppose ' neutralization ot South Vietnam if South Vietnam wants to be neutral. Why do 1 not extend it to North Vietnam? We would welcome the neutralization of North Vietnam, but I am being realistic. North Vietnam isa Communist regime, profeSSedly so, and I dont want to put a barrier in the way of settlement by adding a new term sinceray idea is to have a settlement. If we, the United States, were to put forward a position Imlay that the price of a settlement in Vietnam is u neutralization of North Vietnam we would be putting a barrier in the way of a settlement in light of the nature of their regime. So we have gone aS fur ns we can reasonably go in Saying that so far as U.S. policy is concerned, if the people of South Vietnam want to be neutral, nonalined that is their decision, that is acceptable to the United States. The Chatruan. I think Senator Gore has raised a very valid point that has bothered me, but it seems to me this is the. kind of cpiestion that the conference at Geneva should decide. Wc dont have to decide that in advance. It is a problem that has always bothered me. Ambassador Goldbeuu. Yes, I would agree that is a proper subjeot within the competence of the conference. I gave an interpretation. Senator Gons. Mr. Chairman, the contradiction has not been re-solvcd at. all. The resolution provides that the Geneva accord would be adequate basis for peaceful settlement. The Geneva accord does not nmke reference to two separatC political entities; in fact, it definitely  rules them outThe CnAimtAN. The Senator is correct, but there 1s a proposal for discussion before the Security Council to seek a reference. They dont have to accept thia interpretation. > U.S. POSITION TOWARD NEUTRALITY AS BASIS FOK PEACH Senator Gons. I know, but what is the position of the U.S. Gorern- ment? This is the point nt which I am aiming. Ambassador Golpberg. May I answer it. Sonator Gore. WiIl wo accept the neutrality of Indochina as a basiS of peace? Will we, in fact, accept reunification, self-determination . of one Country? Will we, in fact, be satisfied with, the Geneva accord aS a basis for peace? It appears now that we will not. The CHAIRMAN. I am not sure about that. Ambassador Goldueug. 1 want to make it explicitly clear and it does not appear to be now. With due respect, I want to make it ex plicitly dear we accept the Geneva accord as a basis for peace. I aIso . want to make it explicitly clear when we oft er ti resolution that is the offer. We are ready to hear other views, including the views of this Committee. When I put u piece of paper for informal discussion, it- is Suite agreeable to me to put a piece of paper before the Security ouncil without going into controversial detail, saying we accept the Geneva accord as a basis fm- peace. We ask for the reconvening of the conference and we recognize the competence of the conference to settle, adjudicate it or related problems. I am perfectly willing to pu t that in the resolution and 1 think that meets your point of view, Senator.  The CuairmaN. The Senator from Ohio94      PitAISB F0R D0CUMENTATI0N OF U.S. EFFORTS IN U.N. 'Senator Lausche. Ambassador Goldberg, 1 am grateful to you for your very lucid presentation and documentation of the efforts of the United States to have the United Nations take jurisdiction of the Vietnam dispute. Unfortunately through the propaganda of the CommunistS and in many instances through statements of uninformed individuals within our own country, the impreSsion has been gained that we Sought to escape the rights and the powers of the United Nations to intervene for the establishment of peace in areas of the world where violence existedYour presentation regrettably will not be heard fully by the people of the Nation. But the documentation which you have given refutes Completely every argument that has been made that our Government has not extended its efforts to have the United Nations take jurisdiction. I want to chronologically follow your presentation of what haS been done. You cite the cflortS of the Cambodian Government to Lave the United Nut ions check to aseertain whether or not there were unlawful transgressions on their border by the Communists. And the United Nations did take jurisdiction, but Cambodia finally dropped its petition. Is that Correct? AmbaSSador Goldberg. That is correct, Senator. x.  .  . IS cnSSATIOX or BOMBING PREREQUISITE TO SETTLE JI EXT? I I have been struck by the unanimous recommendation of all the witnesses who have come up on the ManSfiekl and Morse teSolutions  heretofore to the cHect that we didnt have a chance of Securing action . in the Security Council unless there waS a cessation of the bombing first. Each witness stated this in the record. I was wondering what your own views were with regard to this point. Ambassador Goldbkkg. Well, my own view about that is that at the moment that is probably not the determining factor. It may affect, as I said, other countries, but the detenninins factor from the standpoint of countries that Could obstruct Security Council action haS been this concept of no competence, because Hanoi says no competence. But, as 1 have Said, I dont think it serves their interest to pursue that, and I am going to make another effort. Senator Pell. But would it not be correct, to put- it in a more affirmative way, that the chances ofsuccess of some positive action involving cither resolution would be better if there were a cessation of the bombing? ' Ambassador Goldbeiio. I dont, frankly, know the answer to that question bccausc of the experience that we had during the bombing pause. ,, Senator Pell. Excuse me for interrupting, I do not mean a bombing pause. I am among those who are rather concerned at the idea of a Fauso because I can see the thing blowing up further at the end of it. mean Cessation.  ' Ambassador Goldberg. Even with respect to that. You will remember I Said that at that time when we were engaged in an indefinite pause, I Consulted. Now, the viewpoint thou on the part of many countries was that if this was the Situation we ought to develop private diplomacy. If we brought it to the Security Council, there would be a publiC exposition, people would have to take a position, and it would be far better, therefore, to explore by private diplomacy the prospect of another forum, the Geneva conference, and so on. So I really Cannot honestly say. ' I will say in candor, in answer to your remark, that I have no doubt that that would affect the judgment of some. But with respect to thoSC countries that can obstruct the ad ion, those with the veto power, at the moment I dont think it would affect, their judgment. ' 95      Senator Pell. Right..I appreciate your position, and your official, position, too. But 1 think the record should very clearly shove that every witness who has conic here on this resolution has specifically stated that the resolution did not have a chance unless there was a Cessation of the bombing.     Ambussador Goldbf.ig. Senator, 1 might Say tlus is a subject I am quite prepared to talk about; we talk about everything in negotiating a resolution, but I am quite clear in my own mind that on the .basis of every talk I have had this is not the determining factor for the Soviet Union and perhaps France, but. that does not mean ; that we ou'.llt not to try. Senator Pell. Thank you.   VJETC0NG MILITARY BASES AND FORCES Finally, I have one specific question on your testimony in connection with the draft reSolution, Section (b), the Same one that Senator Symington drew our attention to. It says That there should be no military forces or bases maintained or supported in North or South Vietnam other than those under the control of the respective governments, mid nil other troops and armed personnel should be withdrawn or demobilized   . Doos this apply to the Vietcong? Ambassador Golpberg. Yes. By the way, this is not intended to be a formulation of ours. This is intended t< be our interpretation of what the Geneva accords would requuC, and again this was put, and specifically put by me in the form of a question to the other side, IS there disagreement that this is what the Geneva accords require? Senator Pell. But would this not, in fact, be almost a preventive factor in anything coming out? In other words, would it be conceivable, in your view, that that portion of South Vietnam, which IS under Communist discipline or Vietcong discipline would willingly drop its weapons and demobilize while those portions which are under the Ky governments regime maintained their weapons? Ambassador Got.dbehg. Again, I would answer in terms that the Chairman put it. This is what the Geneva accords, in our view, provide; and there is a matter which ought to be discussed in the Geneva Conference as it was discussed in 1951 and in 196'2. There were dcci-sionS made in both 1954 and 1902 about the disarming of irregular forces, and this obviously would be a subject appropriate for diScussion in the Geneva Conferences. This is not put forward to be any barrier. ' . Senator Pell. I understand. AmbaSSftdor Goldberg. As I Said, the language of the resolution is subject to diScusSion. This is intended to be a statement in response to the Statement very often made that we dont state what we think about the Geneva accords. This is what we think. Wc arc ready to taIk about what other people think about the Geneva accords. Senator Pesl. Right. I think we have macle a great Step forward here today in the assertion of our willingness, if necessary, to negotiate with the representatives of the NLF because that haS been an inhibiting factor. AmbaSsaclor GolDberg. Well, I think the President Ims frequently Said that is not an insurmountable problem, and I was repeating it in that contextSenator Pell. I understand and I thank you very much mnd I ' think we are very lucky indeed to have you as our Ambassador to the United Nations, and I wish you the best in your efforts along this lineAmbassador Goldberg. Thank youThe Ohairmax, Senator McCarthy? .  , 96 .     SUBMIT VIETNAM C0NFLICT '10 UNITED NATIONS  I U.S. WITHDRAWAL OF TitOOPS FK0M VIETNAM Senator McCakthy. Mr. AntlmsSador, I have a few questions, one which moves on from the reference Senator Pell has made to your discussion of the Geneva accords. Do I understand that this is the Adini nitrations position in the United Nations, should these other Conditions prevail that you would withdraw troops? 1 Ambassador Golpbehg. This is what the Geneva accords provide and we said we would be willing to use them as a basis for Settlement. Senator McCarthy, Is this limited to what happens in Vietnam? Ambassador. Goldbkrg. I am sorry 1 am not following you. Senator McCarthy, The consideration of whether you would withdraw is limited to what might hajIpen in Vietnam. Docs this have reference to other parts of Soutnea-st Asia or not? Ambassador GoLDueug We are also very interested in observance of the 1962 accords in Laos, very much So. We would like the Laos accord to be complied with. j Senator McCarthy. Where would this leave us in the light of what the Secretary of State said in his rather well publicized press conference of October 12 when he talked about the threat, of a billion Chinese with nuclear weapons to all Southeast Asia and beyond that to the t United Slates itself?  Are wc going to leave this critical area open to a billion Chinese if the question of South Vietnam should be settled within the limits you have"defined or not?  Ambassador GolDberg. 1 think that question ought to be addressed to the Secretary of State.  Senator McCarthy. All right, I will ask the Secretary. Senator Pell. When? Senator Moese. Where? Laughter.is Proceeding through the u.x. ax exercise of futu.ity? -Senator McCakthv. One other question relating to that press conference. You seem to think that proceeding this way through the ; United Nations is worthwhile, at least the efforts you are talking about, even though it nutv not come to very much. Now, the Secretary, when he held a press conference, said about what you have Said in terms of process but then said, "On the other handthere are Some problems about going through an exercise of futility, if this is what it appears to be, to satisfy some critics among our own people.  This is not particular to the process he was thinking about. But, on the record, you dont think this is necessarily an exercise of futility?' . Ambassador Goldbekg. If I thought it was an exercise of futility, I would not engage in ilSenator McCarthy. Very good. Thank you very much. , 97      2. NVN Position Statements .     2. NVN POSITION STATEMENTS (UNCLASSIFIED) INDEX SUBJECT PAGE Extracts from North Vietnamese Statements on The Four Points . 100 Extracts from North Vietnamese Statements on the Front's Position. 105 Extracts from North Vietnamese Statements on The Geneva Agreements. Ill Extracts from North Vietnamese Statements on the U.N115 Extracts from North Vietnamese Statements on Mediation Efforts by other Countries 117 Extracts from North Vietnamese Statements on the Bombing Pause 119 Extracts from North Vietnamese Statements on U.S. Moves...121 Excerpts frcm South Vietnamese National Liberation Front -- North Vietnamese Fatherland Front Joint Statement of October 30,1962. 129 Ho Chi Minhs Interview with Akahata, April 5, 1965...133 Report of the DRV Government Submitted by Pham Van Dong to the DRV National Assembly on April 8, 1965.136 VIA "Authorized" Statement Rejecting the 17 Non-Aligned Nation Appeal.142 Nhan Dan editorial, April 21, 1965 on the NFLSV as the Only Genuine Representative of the South Vietnamese People.144' DRV "white Paper" on "U.S. Aggression and Intervention in Vietnam"...146 DRV Government Statement on President Johnsons July 28, 1965 Press Conference Statement.152 Le Monde Interview with Ho Chi. Minh, August 15, 1965.154 Quan Doi Nhan Dan Editorial of August 20, 1965 Criticizing Attempts at Mediation in Vietnam...156 98     By NWD Dale 2011 SUBJECT PAGE DRV Embassy in Moscow Issues "Correction" of Lord Brockway Press Interview . .159 I DRV Foreign Ministry Memorandum of September 23, 1965..160 Vietnam Courier Article on "How Should the Most Correct Solution to the Vietnam Problem be Understood"..164 Joint Asahi-Mainiehi Interview with Pham Van Dong in Hanoi on October 4, 1965166 Mai Van Bo Statement, January 5, 1967..177 Trinh Interview with Burchett..179 Mai Van Bo Statement, February 22, 1967181 y Pham Van Dong Speech, 1 Sept 1967, on 22nd Anniversary of the Founding of the DRV... 183 99 .     EXTRACTS EKM NORTH VIETifESE STATEMENTS ON THE FOUR POINTS (Report of Pham Van Dong to National Assembly April 8, 1965 -Tab H, pp. 1-2) "...The unswerving policy of the DRV Government is to respect strictly the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam and to implement correctly their basic provisions as embodied in the following points." "The govcrnment of the DRV is of the view that the stand expounded here is the'basis for the soundest political settlement of the Vietnam problem." "If this basis is recognized, favorable conditions will be created for the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam people, and it will be possible to consider the reconvening of an international conference along the pattern of the 1954 Geneva conference on Vietnam." "The DRV Government declares that any approach contrary to the aforementioned stand is inappropriate; any approach tending to secure U.N. intervention in the Vietnam situation is also inappropriate. Such approaches are basically at variance with the 1954 Gencva agreements on Vietnam." (VNA statement rejecting 17 non-aligned nation appealTab J, pp. 1-2) "To settle the Vietnam problem at present, the only correct way is to carry out the points laid down by DRV Premier Pham Van Dong on 8 April 1965." "The DRV Government is of the view that the above-expounded stand is the basis for the soundest political settlement of the Vietnam problem. If this basis is recognized, favorable conditions will be created for the peace-ful settlement of the Vietnam problem and it will be possible to consider the reconvening of an international conference in the pattern of the 1954 Geneva conference on Vietnam." . "The DRV Government declarcs that any approach contrary to the above stand is inappropriate; any approach tending to secure a U.N. intervention in the Vietnam situation is also inappropriate, because such approaches are basically at variance with the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam." 100      (Attack on President Johnson's May 13, 1965 speechTab M, p. 2) "The DRV Government has shovm them a most correct way out in the four-point stand prgsented by Premier rham Van Dong at the sccond session of the DRV National Assembly -- that is, to withdraw from South Vietnam, stop its acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, and let the Viet-namese pcople settle themselves their own affairs. ..." (DRV Foreign Ministry statement on suspension of U.S. Attacks, May 18, 1965 -Tab N, p. 2) "The DRV Government affirms once again that the four-point stand made public on 8 April 1965 is the only sound basis for a political settlement of the Vietnam problem.11 (No DRV reaction to Canadian disclosure of mission to HanoiTab 0, p. 1) "The Foreign Minister stated repeatedly that the four conditions which had previously been outlined by the Prime Minister of North Vietnam on April 8, taken as a whole, represented the Hanoi government's approach to a settlement." (Nhan Dan protests U.K. Government's connivance with U.S. 7 June 1965Tab P, p. 4) "Once again, we stress that the Vietnam problem can be solved only in accordance with the four points mentioned in the statement and resolution of the DRV Government and National Assembly and the five points of the 22 March .1965 statement of the NFISV and on the condition that the U.S. imperialists stop their aggression, withdraw from South Vietnam, stop their attacks against the DRV, respect and implement the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam, and let the Vietnamese people solve their own problems without any foreign intervention." ("White Paper" on "US aggression and intervention in VietnamTab Q, p. 6) "The unswerving policy of the DRV Government-is to strictly respect the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam and to correctly implement their basic provisions as embodied in the following points." 101  Section 3.J    "The DRV Government holds that the above-mentioned stand is the basis for the soundest political settlement of the Vietnam problem. If this basis is accepted, favorable conditions trill be created for the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam problem and it will be possible to consider the reconvening of an international conference of the type of the 1954 Geneva conference on Vietnam." "The Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam declares that any approach contrary to the above stand is irrelevant, any approach leading to a U.N. intervention in the Vietnam situation is also irrelevant, because such approaches arc basically at variance with the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam." (Thong Eat (Reunification) Article by Nguyen Van Vinh July 1965Tab R, pp. 4-6) "The DRV Government is of the opinion that thc abovc-mentioned stand is the b asis for a correct political solution to the Vietnamese problem. Only through recognizing this basis will the peaceful settlement of the Vietnamese problem be afforded the conditions in which it can be conducted favorably and will it be possible to think of convening an international conference of the typc of the 1954- Geneva conference on Vietnam." "The four-point program as set forth by Premier Pham Van Dong and thc views as set forth by the NFISV in its 22 March statement are truly constructive and practical." "If the U.S. imperialists agree to accept the above-mentioned conditions of the people in both North and South Vietnam, we will readily negotiate with them anywhere at any moment." (DRV Report on Ghanaian mission to HanoiTab S) "Presented the four-point stand of the DRV Government, the basis for the soundcst political settlement of the Vietnam problem." . (DRV statement on President Johnsons July 23, 1965 press conference -Tab T, p.2) "For the U.S. Government there is only one way to an honorable peace; 102      that is, to correctly implement the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam and accept thc four-point stand of thc DRV Government." "More recently, on 8 April 195, it made clear its four-point stand as a basis for the soundest political settlement of the Vietnam problem." (Le Monde interview with Ho Chi MinhTab U) "The U.S. Government must give tangible proofs that it accepts the four-point stand of thc Government of the DRV which conforms to the essential political and military clauses of the 1954 Geneva agreement on Vietnam; it must immediately stop the air attacks against DRV territory, stop forthwith the aggressive war against the south of our country, and withdraw from therc all U.S. troops and wcapons. That is peace in honor; thcre is no other way out." (Quan Doi Nhan Dan Editorial of August 20, 1965 -Tab V, p. 1) "Only when the U.S. Government shows concrete manifestations of its recognition of the four-point stand of the DRV Government and the five-point stand of the NFLSV can there be a basis for the peaceful settlement of the war in Vietnam." (DRV Embassy in Moscow issues "correction" of Press InterviewTab W ) . "The four-point stand of the DRV Government as cxpoundcd by Premier Pham Van Dong on 8 April 1965 is the basis for all soundest political solutions to the Vietnam question. If this basis is recognized, favorable conditions will be created for the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam problem and it will bc possible to consider the reconvening of an international conference of the type of the 1954 Geneva conference on Vietnam." '. (Pham Van Dongs National Day report August 31, 1965Tab X, p. 6) "This four-point stand fully conforms to the most important political and military provisions of the 1954 Geneve agreements on Vietnam, and the whole world is now of the view that these agreements must be correctly im-plementcd. This four-point stand must be solemnly accepted by the U.S. Government before a political settlement of the Vietnam problem can be contemplated." 103      (DRV Foreign Ministry memorandum of September 23, 1965Tab Z, p. 4) "Thc four-point stand of the DRV Government ... is the sole correct basis for a settlement of the Vietnam problem. Any solution at variance with it are inappropriate and so are any soultions which seek U. H- intervention in the Vietnam situation, because such solu-tions arc fundamentally contrary to the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam." "The U.S. Government must solemnly declare its acceptance of this four-point stand before a political settlement of the Vietnam problem can be considered. ..." ----------------------------- --------- -------------------------- (Joint Asahi-Main!chi interview with Pnam Van Dorgin Hanoi in October 4, 1965Tab CC, pp. 1-2-4-9-10-11) "Premier Pnam Van Dong of the DRV stated in a very strong tone on 4 October that The present Vietnam .war can never be settled unless thc United States accepts the four conditions presented by our side. And without that, there also can be no discussion." "We proposed four conditions for the settlement of the present war some time ago. They asked for respect of the Geneva agreement of 19>4 concerning the Vietnam question and sought the correct observance of the basic clauses of this agreement. We proposed at the time that if thc United States were to issue a statement to the effect that it accepts the four conditions, we will agree to negotiate at any time." "If the United States wants negotiations, it must accept the four conditions and recognize the NFISV." "We have announced that if the United States issues a statement to the effect that it will recognize the four conditions, we will respond to talks. The United States, however, has no such intention." "The only just way to settle the Vietnam issue is to accept, in line with the 1954 Geneva agreement, the four conditions proposed by the North Vietnamese Government and the stand explained in the NFISV' s March statement." "North Vietnam's one of the essential, accords of 1954. The a correct solution to four conditions are in complete accord with every political, and military provisions in the Geneva four conditions alone can be the basis to bring the Vietnam issue. The U.S. Government must declare clearly that it accepts the four conditions. A political solution can be considered after that." 104 .     3 d EXTRACTS FROM NORTH 11011-2031 STATl'ENTS ON THE FRONTS POSITION (Excerpts from Joint Statement of October 30, 1962Tab A, pp. 2, 4) "...The Vietnam Fatherland Front holds that the NFLSV, which came into being owing to the growth of th South Vietnamese peoples struggle and which rallies broadly the patriotic and anti-U.S.-Dien forces in South Vietnam, is the genuine representative of the people there, and is one of the decisive factors for their certain victory'. The Vietnam Fatherland Front fully supports the program and the urgent steps advocated by the NFLSV to realize independence, democracy, improvement of the peoples living conditions, and peace and neutrality in South Vietnam, in an advance toward the peaceful reunification of the father-land. The program and urgent steps of the NFLSV meet the interests and aspirations of the South Vietnamese people ana conform to the practical situation in South Vietnam at present" "...The 14 million South Vietnamese compatriots trill develop more and more their valiant and indomitable tradition and unite more and more widely and closely within the NFLSV to directly oppose the U.S.-Dien clique.) (Excerpts from National Assembly Statement Published July 5, 1964 -Tab B, pp. 1 and 2) "...The U.S. Government must put an end to its aggressive war in South Vietnam, withdraw all its troops and weapons from there, and let the South Vietnamese people settle their own internal affairs by then-selves in accordance with the program of the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam..." "...The National Assembly of the DRV wholeheartedly supports the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam and firmly bel eves that the South Vietnamese people, who are closely united under the fronts banner and are heightening their determination to fight and to win,.." (Excerut fro- Text of DRV-USSR Delegations Joint Statement, February 10, lTab ?, p. 2) "...The Soviet Union fully supports the just and hbroic struggle for independence, democracy, peace, and neutrality which the South Vietnamese people are waging under the leadership of the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam.. 105  Section 3.J    (Report by Pham Van Dong to the National Assembly April 8, 1965 -Tab H, p. 5) "...In response to the appeal of the NFLSV, the South Vietnamese cadres, ar.nymen, and ordinary citisens regrouped to thc north hav. enthusiastically voiced their readiness to return to their, native land and to fight, arms in hand, or to do any work to contribute to the annihilation of the ener.y and to national salvation..." (DRV-SOVIET Communique issued April 1?, 1965Tab I, p. 1) "...the National Front 01 Liberation is the genuine exponent of the will and aspirations of the people of South Vietnam, its only legitimate representative. The program of the front enjoys (the broad?) support of the mass of the.people because it proclaims independence, democracy, peace, an end to (imperialist?) intervention and the formation in South Vietnam of a national, democratic coalition government carrying through a policy of independence and neutrality in full conformity with the Geneva agreements of 1954..." (VNA on l7-Nonaligned Nation Appeal, April 19, 1965Tab J, p. 1) "...The NFLSV is now controlling three-fourths of South Vietnam's territory and two-thirds of its population. It is clear that at the present time any solution to the South Vietnam issue without the de-cisive voice of the NFLSV is impractical..." ("Nhan,Dan" Editorial April 21, 1965 on the NFLSVTab K, pp. 1,2) "...In the world, the voice of the NFLSV is the decisive one in the settlement of the South Vietnam question..." "... A. N. Kosygin declared Today everybody must see that the NFLSV, which is leading the South Vietnamese peoples struggle, is a real force which decides the present as well as the future of South Vietnam. Premier Chou En-lai has on many occasions asserted that the NFLSV is the only legal representative of the South Vietnam population..." 106 .     "...Just as the NFLSV Central Committee declared in its communique of 15 April, any settlement of the South Vietnam question trill lose its practical and positive meaning if it is undertaken without the participation of the NFLSV in a decisive role..." "...and all negotiations tri th the U.S. imperialists at this moment are entirely useless if they still refuse to withdraw from South Vietnam all their troops and all kinds of war materiel and meansand those of the satellitesif they still do not dismantle all their military cases in South Vietnam, if the traitors still surrender the South Vietnamese peoples sacred rights to independence and democracy to the U.S. imperialists, and if the NFLSV'the only genuine representative of the 14 million South Vietnamese peopledoes not have its decisive voice." (DRV White Paper on "United States Aggression and Intervention in Vietnam" Tab Q, pp. 1, 2, 4 and 6) "...The NFLSV, founded on 20 December 1960, more and more clearly proves to be the sole genuine representative of the people, the mobilizer and organizer of all patriotic forces in South Vietnam..." "...It unites all social strata, classes, nationalities, political parties, organizations, religious groups, and patriotic personalities, irrespective of political tendency, to fight and overthrow the rule of the U.S. imperialists and their agents, achieve independence, democracy, better living conditions, peace, and neutrality for South Vietnam and eventual peaceful national reunification..."  "...To date, the NFLSV has gained control of four-fifths of the territory and 10 million people; that is, two-thirds of the population in South Vietnam. It has become a powerful force which has a decisive voice in the South Vietnam problem..." . "...The United States talks about its desire to hold discussion with a view to finding a peaceful solution to the South Vietnam question, but it refuses to recognize the liFLSV as the sole genuine representative of the South Vietnam people. It is obvious that the United States wants neither peace nor negotiation..." "...All negotiations at this moment are entirely useless if the U.S. imperialists still persist in refusing to withdraw from South Vietnam all their troops and war materials of all kinds and those of their satellities, and to dismantle all their .military bases in South Vietnam, if the Vietnamese traitors continue to surrender to the U.S. imperialists the South Vietnamese peoples sacred rights to independence, 107      and if the NFLSVthe only genuine representative of the 14 million South Vietnamese peopleis not asked to say its decisive say..." (Excerpts from Nguyen Van Vinhs 4part article a Vietnamese language newspaper on July 2, 6, 9 issued in "Reunification", and 13Tab R, pp. 2,3 ) "...The United States still carries on war in the south and still refuses to recognize the presence of the NFLSVwhich controls most of the territory and population of the south and which leads the sacred resistance of 14 million people in South Vietnam. Therefore, the United States continues to ba fought against by the South Vietnamese people, and there can be no peace..." "...Moreover, they have brazenly stated that they are determined to eliminate the NFLSV from all international conferences, and, at worst, they can regard the NFLSV only as the tail of North Vietnam..." "...In the past the Americans did not want to negotiate with the CPR or to recognize the Pathet Lao. The French did not want to recognize the Viet Minh and the Algerian FLN. But finally they were defeated and forced to negotiate with them. Concerning this point, in 'its famous 22 March statement the NFLSV declared Any negotiation with the U.S. imperialists about the South Vietnamese,problem will be useless if the U.S. imperialists refuse to respect and strictly implement the Geneva accords, abolish the U.S. military bases, and withdraw from South Vietnam all the soldiers, weapons, and other war materiel of the United States and its satellites, if the sacred rights of the Vietnamese peopleindependence and democracycontinue to be offered to the U.S. imperialists by the kneeling traitors, and if the NFLSVthe only .legitimate representative of 14 million southern peopledoes not have a decisive voice..." (DRV on President Johnsons July 28, 1965 Press Conference Statement Tab T, p. 2) "...The U.S. Government must stop at once its air war against the DRV and completely cease all er.crcach.--.ents on the sovereignty and security of the DRV. It must put an immediate end to the aggressive war in South Vietnam, withdraw all U.S. troops and weapons therefrom, and let the South Vietnamese people settle their own affairs in accordance with the program of the NFLSVthe only genuine representative of the South Vietnamese people..." 108 .     (LE MONDE Interview with Ho Chi MinhHanoi Broadcast in English, August 15, 1965Tab U, p. 1) ...(Q)...the South Vietnamese people must be left to solve their own affairs themselves without foreign interference and on democratic bases? (A) "...on the basis of the program of the NFLSV, the authentic representative of the South Vietnam people..." sole (Phan Van Dongs National Day Report, August 31, 1965Tab X, p. 1) "...In response to the pressing requirements of the patriotic struggle, in 1960 the NFISV came into being, closely uniting all strata of the people holding high the banner of patriotism, and starting the resistance war against U.S. imperialist aggression..." "...The NFLSV, now controlling more than four-fifths of South Vietnams territory and over two-thirds of its peculation, is the only genuine representative of the people of South Vietnam. The Fronts international prestige and influence increase with every passing day. The Front is now the real master of the situation in South Vietnam. It must have a decisive say in the settlement of the South Vietnam question...11 (DRV Foreign Ministry Memorandum of September 23, 1965Tab Z, pp. 1,2,3) "...U.S. troops trill not withdraw, but .-Till cling on to South Vietnam; the United States always regards South Vietnam as a separate nation, that is to say, it wants the partition of Vietnam to be prolonged indefinitely; it does not recognize the NFLSV, the sole genuine representative of the people of South Vietnam. As a matter of fact, its scheme is to try to achieve at the conference table what it has been unable to gain on the battlefield..." "...The NFLSV, the organizer and leader of the South Vietnamese peoples fight against the U.S. aggressors, has gained sympathy, support, and recognition from ever broader sections of the world's peoples. Yet the U.S. Government refuses to recognise it as the sole genuine representative of the people of South Vietnam. It has declared that it does not regard the front as an independent party in negotiations. This 109 .     This further exposes its talks about negotiations as a mere swindle. There cannot be any negotiations on the South Vietnam problem without the NFLSV having its decisive say..." "...This stand also proceeds from the legitimate aspirations of the Vietnamese people in both somes, as embodied in the program er ths Vietnam Fatherland Front and that of the NFLSV; namely, peace, independ- ence, unity, and democracy..." (DRV Message to the Austrian Red Cross Society, September 2 5, 1965 -Tab Al) "...The only genuine representative of the South Vietnamese people is the NFLSV. The Red Cross organization set up by the front is the only organ serving the interests of the South Vietnamese people..." (Joint Asahi-Main!chi Interview with Pham Van Dong in Hanoi, October 4, 1965 Tab CC, pp. 3, 4, 8 and 9) ...It is very foolish of the United States not to recognise this Liberation Front which is the only force which has the ability to settle the Vietnam problem..." "...The best way is for the United States to negotiate first with the Liberation Front. That is only natural, considering that the United States is actually fighting the Liberation Front..., The United States should negotiate with the Liberation Front of the South first of all. However, it will be out of the question if it were to take the attitude of negotiating with the Liberation Front as if it were conveying a favor. The primary and decisive party for the United States to deal with is the Liberation Front..." "...as long as the United States does not recognize the Peoples Liberation Front of the south, there cannot be any negotiations..." ...Who is fighting the United States in the south? It is the liberation army. And yet, the U.S. side is escalating the war against the north. Does it think that it can negotiate with the north alone and settle the problem?.,." 110     By NWD Date 201 I EXTRACTS FRCM NC1TH VmVQESE STATEtoTS QR THE GENEVA AGREEMENTS (Joint Statement October 30, 1962Tab A, pp. 1-2) "...the Vietnamese people and the Government of the DRV constantly implemented correctly the 1954 Geneva Agreements on Vietnam..." . "...This is a just struggle, which conforms to the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam... (DRV National Assembly Statement July 5, 1964Tab B, pp 1-2) '...The U.S. Government as well as the governments of the countries which took part in the 1954 Geneva conference on Indochina must live up to their commitments respect and sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial integrity of Viet-Nam, and refrain from interfering in its internal affairs "...we demand that the 1954 Geneva agreements on Indochina be strictly implemented (DRV Foreign Ministry Letter September 4, 1964Tab C, pp 1-2) "...The DRV Government has more than once stated its eagerness for peace and its constant desire of respecting and correctly implementing the 1954 Geneva agreements on Viet-nam..." "...The DRV Government... earnestly requests the cochairmen and the participants of the 1954 Geneva conference on Indochina, in accordance with point 13 of the final declaration of the conference, jointly to study such measures as might prove to be necessary to secure from the U.S. Government an immediate end to all acts of provocation and sabotage against the DRV and to the aggressive war in South Vietnam, as well as the withdrawal of all U.S, troops, military personnel, and arms from South Vietnam, thereby insuring respect for and correct implementation of the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam with a view to maintaining and consolidating peace in Indochina and southeast Asia (DRV Note of Protest Issued February 9, 19&5Tab E, pg 2) 11 ...The Vietnamese people and the DRV Government, who have always respected and correctly implemented the 1954 Geneva agreements cn Indochina, will certainly not be cowed by the U.S. attempts at intimidation11 "...It resolutely demands that thc U.S. Government correctly implement the 1954 Geneva arreements cn Vietnam, and stop at once the aggressive war in South Vietnam and all acts of war against the DRV" "The 111      "The DRV Government earnestly requests the cochairman and the govern-r.ent of .the participating countries of the 1954 Geneva conference on Endcc'nina and a31 peace-loving countries cf the world to take timely and effective actions with a view to checking the hands cf the warlike and aggressive U.S. imperialists, insuring a correct implc-entatien cf the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam, and defending peace in Indochina and Southeast Asia.! (Joint Statement February 10, 1965Tab F, pp. 2-3) .,. ;The two governments... regard these acts as completely inconsistent with international law and the 1954 Geneva Agreements" ... "The two sides unanimously note that for the past 10 years and more the U.S. Government has sabotaged ths 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam, sought to hinder the reunification of Vietnam, and turned South Vietnam into a new-type colony and a military base of the United States" ... ,The two governments firmly stand for the deetnse and implementation of the 1954 Geneva agreements on Indochina, resolutely oppose the U.S. violations of the said agreements, and demand that all participants of the 1954 Geneva conference respect and correctly inplgnent the As a. cochaiman of the Geneva conference on Indochina, the Soviet Union will do its best to ensure international support for the 1954 Geneva agreements on Indochina... ? (Ho Chi Minhs Interview with Akahata April 5, 1965Tab G, pp. 2-3) "...The U.S. imperialists' acts of aggression and war in Vietnam are of the utmost gravity; they grossly trample upon the 1954 Geneva agrecnents on Vietnam and constitute violations of international law and manifestations of disregard for world public opinion,.. "...To settle the South Vietnam question, first of all the United States must withdraw from South Vietnam, let the South Vietnamese people themselves decide their own affairs, and stop its provocative attacks against the DRV. The carrying out of these basic points will bring about favorable condition for a conference along the pattern of the 1954 Geneva conference. Such is a reasonable and sensible approach which is beneficial to peace and to the U.S. people11 (Pham Van Dong's Report to D?.7 National Assembly April S, 1965Tab H, pp 1,2,4) i..If this basis is recognised, favorable conditions wi?3 be created fcr the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam people, and it will be possible to consider ths reconvening of an international ccnferer.ce along the pattern cf the 1954 Geneva conference cn Vietnav,!l !E.Te 112     By NWD Dale 2011 W. .We believe the world's people were awakened on hearing President -Johnson sued cf a return to the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam. Tn-s was a laugh. Everyone knows the U.S. imperialists are the enemy of the Geneva agreements" "...By attacking the DRV they have completely scrapped the Geneva agreements and grossly violated international law and all human laws. They must pay for their crimes" (DRV Statement on 17 NationAppealTab J, pg. 1) 11... It is the unswerving policy of the DRV Government to strictly respect the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam and to correctly implement their basic provisions as embodied in the following points (DRV Statement on Suspension of U.S. Attacks May 18, 19&5Tab N, pg. 2) "...The peace-loving peoples and governments in the world are firmly demanding that the United States end its aggressive war in South Vietnam, stop for good the savage bc-tbing and strafing raids against the DRV, and scrupulously observe and correctly implement the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam..." (DRV "White PaperTab Q, pp. 1, 6) "...But the heroic South Vietnam people have risen up in arms against the aggressors for national salvation and self-liberation. Theirs is a thoroughly just struggle which fully conforms to the 1954 Geneva agreements and to international law" "The DRV Government has always held that the correct implementation of the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam is the correct way of settling the South Vietnam problem" (Thong Nat Article July 1965Tab R, pg. 2) '...If the U.S. imperialists really respect the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam, they must first of all recognize the fundamental provisions of the Geneva agreements on the sovereignty, unity, independence, and territorial integrity cf Vietnam and the subsequent provisions insuring the implementation of the Geneva agreements; also, the United States must immediately abolish all U.S. military bases, withdraw.all troops, weapons, and war equipment of the United States and its satellites from South Vietnam, and ston all forms of aggression in South Vietnam and all war activities against the DRV" 113 .     (Quan Doi Nhan Dan Editorial August 20, l$65Tab V, pg. 1) "...Now the Vietnamese people only demand that the U.S. imperialists return to ths 1954 Geneva agreements they must stop their aggression, withdraw U.S. troops free. South Vietnam, stop air raids on North Vietnam and let the Vietnamese people settle their internal affairs themselves..." (Joint counique September 16, 1965Tab Y, pg 1) "...The fundamental rights of the Vietnamese people to independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity of their country were solemnly recognized by the 1954 Geneva agreements .and must be respecter" (DRV Foreign Ministry Memorandum September 23, 1965Tab Z, pp. 2-3) "...The DRV Government has cn repeated occasions declared that internationally speaking the consideration cf the U.S. Government's war acts against the DRV and the U.S. war of aggression in South Vietnam, falls within the competence of the participants in the 1954 Geneva conference on Indochina, and not of the United Nations. Any U.N. resolution in furtherance of the above U.S. scheme will be null and void and will completely discredit the United Nations "This stand proceeds from the fundamental principles of the 1954 Geneva agreements, which recognize the national rights of the Vietnamese people independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity and from the essential military clauses of the said agreements.I! The 1954 Geneva agreements are an international legal document -which al 1 participants must respect and correctly implement. At the 1954 Geneva conference the U.S. Govern?.ent, through its delegate, recognized and pledged respect for them. Yet throughout the past 11 years it has systematically violated them and had thus brought about a serious situation in Vietnam11 (Vietnam Courier ArticleTab BB, pp. 1-2) ,;...The only way out for the U.S. imperialists is to put an end to their aggressive war, to withdraw all their troops and weapons as well as those of their satellites, to respect the independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity of cur country as stipulated in the 1954 Geneva Agree.ents" .    By NWD Date 201 I EXTRACTS FROM sCRTH ymmESE STATEMENTS CN THE U. i.. (Pham Van Dong's Report to DRV National AssemblyTab H, pg. 2) ,..any approach tending to secure U.s. intervention in. the Vietnam situation is also inappropriate. Such approaches are basically at variance with the 1954 Geneva agreements cn Vietnam." (DAV Statement Rejecting 1? Nation .AppealTab J, pg. 2) ...The DRV Goverment declares that any approach contrary to the above stand is inappropriate; any approach tending to secure a U.N. intervention in the Vietnam situation is also inappropriate, because such approaches are basically at variance with the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam..." (DRV 'White Paper"Tab Q, Pg. 6) ...The Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam declares that any approach contrary to the above stand is irrelevant, any approach leading to a UMN intervention in the Vietnam situation is also irrelevant, because such approaches are basically at variance with the 1954 Geneva agreements on VietnamI (Statement on President Johnson's July 23, 1965 Press Conference Statement -Tab Tpg. 2) "...There is no other way, not even the resorting to U.N. intervention in Vietnam" (DRV Foreign Ministry Merandum September 23, 1965Tab Z, pp. 2-4) ..The U.S. authorities are also feverishly trying by every means to secure a U.N. intervention in Vietnam. They have 'requested help from the United Nations membership at large Ln getting peace talks started.' This is a maneuver to use the United Nations to impose on the Vietnamese people negotiations under U.S. terms" ,.,Any U.'W resolution in furtherance of the above U.S. scheme wi 11. be null and void and will completely discredit the United Nations" "The      "...The four-point, stand of the DTI Oo'ement is enjoying an ever-warmer syeoathy and support frc the peace-loving govern cats and peoples all over the world. It is mhe sole correct basis for a settle-mt cf the Vietna- prcbleu. Ary solutions at variance with it are inappropriate and so are any solutions which seek U.N. intervention in the Vietnam, situation, because such solutions are fundamentally contrary to the 1954 Geneva agreements in Vie-nam.      EXTRACTS FEMIi EC fH VIEm-FSE SCATEF,;NTS CN t tfCi jqtiil m-ll-t ------------------- (DRV Reject-on of Raunazrsm.an Proposal Tao L) '..The Indian authorities have recently dealt with the establish-r.s-nt of an Asian-African fores to (Ysupervise) the demarcation line between Ncrth and South Vietr.au. and (?considered) is a necessary measure for the (?restoration of) peace in this area" (Khan Dar. Protests U.K.s Connivance wit- U.S. June 7, 1965Tab P pg. 3) ...To demand a cease-fire as mentioned in the British Government plan, or the Indian Government1 s proposal sc.ro time ago, is deliberately to ignore the nature and the origin of the war in Vietnam..." (Quan Doi Nhan Dar. Editorial August 20, 1965Tab V, pg. 3) uCr.e cannot mediate between, the U.S. imperialists' stand to carry out aspress-on to m ere ana vne e-emia-ese peoples tnorougn st to oppose aggression. If anyeody wants to stand as mediator without condemning the a-gressors and demanding that the latter stop their aggression and without aunroving and supporting the victims of aggression in their struggle against the aggressors, he can but encourage the aggressors to continue their aggression" (Joint Asahi-Mainiehi Interview with Pham Van Dong October 4, 1965Tab'CC, pp. 2, 3, 9) i-,..The United States is -reposing neace talks, in which it does not believe, in order to escape criticism from these third parties of good intention and world public opinion which is steadin- mounting against it. Through these various methods the United States is trying to test our attitude... ,;...It is not possible to seise this opportunity and move forward toward, peace because the US side has no sincerity at all. Et is possible to seise this opportunity and exccse the true nature of the United States. Cf ccttrss, we welccme those people who are -.iking various efforts, with good intentions of peace, '..'e are planning to prove to these people by actual deeds how lacking in good intentions the United States is. The way to prove this lies solely in driving the American aggressors to the wall and by pressing t-.e-t to the last point, or in other words, in continuing the '.-.'ar" "...We 117           ZTRLCTS Fit NORTH VEMmEE Sr.o-s py Rl (DRV Foreign Ministry Statement, May 18, 1965Tab N, pp. 1-2) ...According to various sources, the U.S. Governr-ent has informed, a number of other governeots that air raids against the ERV are to be suspense-, from noon (.Jas-instcn time) 12 May 1965 till the following week, and that the United States is ready to resur-.a the raids if U.S. and puppet troops are subjected to.rt-er attacks in South Vietnam, ln making this perfidious allegation, the U.S. aggressors have no other aim than to cover up their extremely dangerous acts intensifying the war in Vietnam ar.d Southeast Asia and at the same time io deceive world public opinion on the so-called U.S. peace vdll..." '...This time, in the face cf the mounting movement for an end to the aggressive war in South Vietnam and to the bombing ar.d strafing of the DRV, the U.S. Governr.ent has put forward the so-called suspension of air raids against North Vietnam. It has gone so far as to state arrogantly that the suspension of U.S. air raids on the north must be responded to by a cessation of attacks against the U.S. aggressors and their agents by the people and liberation ar.-y in South Vietnam..." "...The DRV Cover.reent resolutely exposes the U.S. Governments trick in the so-callei suspension of air raids against North Vietnam as a deceitful xaneuver designed to pave the way for new U.S. acts of war. The peace-loving peoples ar.d gcvem-ents in the world are firmly demanding that the United States end its aggressive war in South Vietnam, stop for good the savage bombing and strafing raids against the DRV, ar.d scrupulously observe aid correctly implement the 1954 Geneva agrees.ants on Vietnam. The DRV Government affirms once again that the four-point stand made public on 8 April 1965 is the only sound basis for a political settlement of the Vietnam problem." T (Nhan Dan Protests U.K. Goverer-ents Connivance with the United States, Juns 7, 1965 ---Tab P, p. 3) '...In mid-Nay, while the U.S. leading circles boasted about a pause ' in the airstrikes against North Vietnam, the U.S. imperialists did r.ot cease sending aircraft to reconnoiter and strike North Vietnam, ar.d rushing more U.S. troops and weapons into South Vietnam. These facts enable us -o understand that intensification and expansion of the. aggressive war in Vietnam is the basic policy of the U.S. imperialists. As for the arguments about negotiations and cease-fire, they are but tricks aimed at creating favorable conditions for the carrying out of their policy." 119      (Joint Asahi-xainichi Interview With rhav. Van Dong in Hanoi October 4, 1965, Tab CO, pp. 4, ?) -...The United States temporarily suspendsbombings against the north at one time but that was only a pretext for strengther.ir--escalation..." "...Earlier, the United States propagandized that it had suspended bombings against the north for some days. However, we were not able to respond, as the suspension of the bombings were aimed at eliciting our consent to demands which we cannot possibly accept. The temporary suspension was rather a pretext for further escalation. We cannot possibly accept such temporary suspension or such demands. 120 .     EXTRACTS FROM NChTH VIEQ'toSE STATE EFTS CM U.S. MOVES (DRV Statement July 5, 1964Tab B, pp. 1-2) ...With regard to North Vietnam, the U.S. imperialists have intensified their provocative and sabotage activities and threatened to extend their war to the north ,..the National Assembly of the DRV resolutely demands that the U.S. Government stop at once all its provocative and sabotage activities against the DRV.Y "Should the U.S. imperialists and their stooges be rash enough to expand their war to North Vietnam, all people of North Vietnam, millions as one man, would stand up together with the people in the south to defeat them...11 (DRV Foreign Ministry Letter September f, 1964Tab C, pg. 1) "...Since its unwarranted attack against the DRV on 5 August 1964, the U.S. Government has increased its military build-up in South Vietnam and southeast Asia" "While carrying out this large-scale movement of troops, the U.S. authorities have openly announced the possibility that wider action against North Vietnam might become necessary" (Nhan Dan Editorial, December 19, 1964Tab D) ...While being unable to win in South Vietnam, they even threaten to attack the North, thus opening a new war11 (DRV Note of Protest February 9, 1965Tab E, pg. 1) ..The 7 and S Feoruary 1965 air attack is a new, extremely serious at f war perpetrated by the United States against the DRV, a most brazen v-olat-on 01 international law and the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam, and an intoleraole challenge to the world's peooles,..,11 J (DRV-USSR Joint Statement February 10, 1965Tab F, pg. 2) "The two governments energetically condemn the aggressive acts on 5 August 1964 of the united States, especially the barbarous attacks by the U.S. 121      U.S. Air Force on the territory of the DRV on 7 and 8 February of this year . in the areas of Dong Hoi ar.d Vinh Linh. They regard these acts as cc-.pletely inconsistent with international law ar.d the 1954 Geneva Agreements" (Ho Chi Minhs Interview with Akahata April 5, 1965Tab G, pp. 1-2) ,..For over 10 years now, the U.S. imperialists have waged an aggressive war in South Vietnam in an attempt to turn that zone into a U.S. new-type colony ar.d military base and to prolong the partition of our country" ,In an attempt to extricate themselves from their impasse, the U.S. imperialists are feverishly intensifying and stepping up the aggressive war in South Vietnam...the war is being carried to the north with repeated air and naval attacks being brazenly launched on many places of the territory of the DRV" "Of late, the U.S. imperialists have put forward misleading talk about peace ar.d negotiation. The peoples of the world are fully aware of their aggressive and warlike nature. To step up aggression in South Vietnam and to bomb the no.th are part of their policy of special warfare. By such acts, they also aim at bringing about an advantageous position so as to be able, in case cf necessity, to negotiate from a position of strength. This policy is wrong and cannot be carried out" (Pham Van Dong's Report to DRV National Assembly April 8, 1965Tab H, pp.2,3,5) ...Today, the U.S. imperialists are oblighed to refer to the Geneva agreements on Vietnam but with the aim of distorting the basic principles of the agreements in order to perpetuate our countrys division and to consider the north and the south as two entirely different nations11 "...In his speech, President Johnson spoke of peace, the end of the war, and unconditional negotiations,however, the U.S. government is nowintensifying the aggressive war in South Vietnam and extending the war to North Vietnam, and according to General Taylor's statement,-there wiIl be no limit to the aggression against North Vietnam" "...By engaging in this highly dangerous military adventure, they  stupidly hope to cow our people and also intimidate peace-loving governments and peoples in the world. They hope that our people and the peoples of the world will flinch out of fear, and thus they will be in a position to shift from a weak to a strong position!" E.ATnat causes us to be moved and enthusiastic is that in recent months, in the United States itself, a movement has been developing widely to oppose the U.S. imperialists who are stepping up the war of aggression in South' Vietnam ar.d increasing their acts of war against North Vietnam" 122      (Joint communique April 17, 1965Tab I, pg. 1) ,!...the United States is still keeping a course for the extension of the acts of aggression against the people of South Vietnam and dees not seek to explore avenues leading to a peaceful solution of the Vietnamese nroblem." "It is significant that the statement by the U.S. President on a so-called peaceful settlement has been made at a tine when further bcmbings of the territory of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, are taking place, when there are further movements of American military units ar.d weapons to South Vietnam to step up the blood; aggression against the people of South Vietnam and these aggressive actions continue" (DRV Statement Rejecting 17 Nation AppealTab J, pg. 1) "...To soothe and mislead public opinion, on 7 April 1965, U.S. President Lyndon Johnson spoke of peace and independence in South Vietnam, . of unconditional negotiations toward a political solution to the war in South Vietnam. He even promised to set aside 1 billion dollars to develop the economy and raise the living standard of the peoples in southeast Asian countries. But in this very speech, Johnson declared that the United States will not withdraw from South Vietnam and will intensify its air raids against North Vietnam. (llhan Dan Attack on President Johnson's May 13, 1965 SpeechTab M, pp. 1-2) "...Once again Johnson clamored that the United States is ready for unconditional discussions. But he could not hide his sinister design, which is disclosed in his own speech. Before speaking of unconditional discussions, Johnson declared that the United States will not abandon its commitment to its henchmen in Saigon, and right after speaking of unconditional discussions, he threatened that if North Vietnam refuses to negotiate on U.S. terms, this will only mean damage to North Vietnam" "...As regards North Vietnam, the U.S. imperialists have unceasingly intensified their war of destruction" "...The U.S. aggressors are This is an undeniable fact. The obviously a big swindle" escalating the war in a dangerous manner, so-called unconditional discussions are 123      (DRV Statement on Suspension of U.S. Attacks May IS, 1965Tab N, up. 1-2) "...The U.S. trick is nothing new. It is to be recalled that on 7 April 1965 U.S. President Johnson had to speak of unconditional discussions and peaceful settle-ent of the Vietnam. problem.But within one month after these hypocritical words, another 16,COO U.S. troops have been sent to South Vietnam, thus bringing the strength of U.S. troops there to nearly 50,000. U.S. air raids against North Vietnam, have increased fourfould as compared with the period from 5 August 1964 to 7 April 196511 By making the cessation of the South Vietnamese people's just struggle a condition for the ending of the U.S. bombing and strafing of North Vietnam, the U.S. Government has clearly revealed its scheme to prepare for an intensification and expansion of the war against the DRV..,." The DRV Government resolutely exposes the U.S. Governments trick in the so-called suspension of air raids against North Vietnam as a deceitful maneuver designed to pave the way for new U.S. acts of war" (Nhan Dan Protests U.K's Connivance with the U.S. June 7, l?65Tab P, pg. 2) "...Being bitterly defeated in'South Vietnam and strongly protested and condemned by the world peoples, the U.S. imperialists are madly stepping up and expanding the war, hoping by so doing to get out of their impasse" (DRV "White Paper"Tab Q, pp.2-5) "...In an attempt to find a way cut of this crumbling position, the United States plots to extend the war beyond South Vietnam's borders. "Since early 1964 the U.S. ruling circles in Washington have envisaged carrying the war to North Vietnam,! "...Noteworthy is plan No. 6 vrarked out by Walt W. Rostow, the policy-planner of the U.S. State Department. This plan envisages three stages; first stage naval blockage of Haiphong port second stage naval attacks 'on North Vietnam, coastal installations; and third stage air bombings of North Vietnam" "...The United States says that it wants a peaceful settlement of the war in Vietnam, but at the ss.se time it declares that it will not withdraw, either openly or under the cloak of a meaningless agreement. A peacigful settlement, which coes not incuce the wuhdrawal of U.S. satellite troops from South Vietnam cannot be regarded as such by sound-minded people" "The United States says that it wants to seek a peaceful settlement of the war in Vietnam because -- wants peace to be quickly restored, but it deems it necessary to increase its response and make attacks by air11      "..."nile talking about peace, the United States continue to intensify the war in South Vietnam and to extend the war with its air force and navy ' to North Vietnam. This nay lead to unforeseeable consequences" The aggressive and bellicose features of the U.S. Government are further laid bare by the following arrogant action Cn 24 April 1965 President Johnson designated the whole of Vietnam and the waters adjacent thereto up to 1CO miles from the Vietnamese coasts, and part of the territorial waters of the Chinese Peoples Republic around the Paracels of Islands, as a cc-ibat zone of the U.S. armed forces. This is in essence a move toward a blockage of the DRV and, at the same time, a preparation for larger-scale military adventures" (Thong Nat Article July 1965Tab R, pg. 2 ) .Obviously, as long as the U.S. imperialists continue to spin such nonsensical stories and to explain the southern people's uprising as a reaction to North Vietnamese aggression so as to have a pretext for attacking the DRV, this will mean that the U.S. imperialists still want to continue war and that it will be impossible to achieve peace; in other words, the United States will continue to attack the North and the northern people will be obliged to return blows1' (DRV Government Statement on President Tab T, pg. 1) Johnsons July 28, 1965 Press Conference "...This hypocritical talk cannot possibly cover up and distort the truth. In fact, the U.S. Government has sabotaged the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam, trampled upon international laws, continuously intervened in the internal affairs of the Vietnamese people, sent U.S. troops against the South Vietnamese people, bombed and strafed the territory of the DRV, and has gone to the length of bluntly stating that it vzill not withdraw from South Vietnam11 "...It is talking about peace discussions to conceal the plan for intensified war. Its design is to prolong indefinitely the partition of Vietnam ar.d to stick to South Vietnam in a bid to turn that zone into a U.S. new type colony and military base for attack against the DRV, thus jeopardising peace in Asia and the world..,.'1 . ,!The DRV Government once again exposes the U.S. authorities' deception of unconditional discussions, which is in essence a perfidious maneuver to impose by force on the Vietnamese people submission to the U.S. policy of aggression" .     (Quan Doi Nhan Dan Editorial August 20, 1965Tab V, pg. 2) ...To beat a dm for this deceitful peace, Johnson has been ballyhooing that the United States has made considerable concessions, than ..asn-ington tried again and again to change its attitude, that the United States does not oppose free elections throughout all Vietnam and is ready to dis-cuss Hanoi's proposals" l!...the Vietnamese people have seen clearly the U.S. aggressive design through their peaceful negotiations smokescreen the United States never speaks of withdrawal of U.S. troops and weapons from South Vietnam, abolition of U.S. military bases in South Victr.na, and a definite end to their CJsTiJ. bombing raids on North Vietnam. This means that the U.S. imperialists will continue to carry out their aggression in Vietnam ar.d violate most seriously the basic provisions of the Geneva agreements while unleashing their peaceful negotiations swindle.- Moreover, right at the moment when they were speaking of peaceful negotiations, they have brazenly poured tens of thousands of aggressive troops into South Vietnam, and increased bcbing raids on North Vietnam to an ever fiercer extent. By so doing, unquestionably the U.S. imperialists are deliberately throwing every possibility on the political settlement of the Vietnam issue into the greatest impasse,..." (Pham Van Dong's National Day Report August 31, 1965Tab X, pp. 2-4, 6) 11 ...The extension of air attacks on North Vietnam by the U.S. imperialists is an extremely blatant war act against the DRV, an independent and sovereign country. This is a most serious violation of the 1964 Geneva agreements on Indochina, of the U.N. Charter, and of international law. In their escalation against North Vietnam the U.S. imperialists have committed inhumane crimes, bombing and strafing densely populated areas, many hospitals..." "...The U.S. imperialists st it continue the escalation in the north' They may even start a nevz Korean war in this area1' "...In his speech on 23 July President Johnson even began to talk about his readiness to discuss Hanoi's proposals, to mention the question of reunifying Vietnam, and the ULSV. Thy is there such a change? Is that an indication of Washington's Willingness for peace? "Replying to this question, we must consider not the statements by the U.S. ruling circles, but their deeds; that have they done? They have been intensifying the aggressive war in South Vietnam and stepping up the escalation in the north..., ,..In a word, President Johnson talks about peace in an attempt to cover up his war schemes; the more he talks about peace the more he steps up the war11 "...As & 126      "...As for the U.S. escalation of the war to the north, it obviously constitutes an intolerable act of aggressionTo bow down before the threats of the U.S. imperialists or to compromise with them would constitute an act of encourager-ent fraught with incalculably serious consequences . III. I  I ... I ... I S. -(DRV Foreign Ministry Memorandum September 23, 1965Tab Z, pp. 1-2) Since 7 April 1965 the U.S. authorities have on repeated occasions professed readiness to engage in 'unconditional discussions' and made proposals for a 'cease-fire,' a suspension of the bombing of the north.' But is is in this very period that U.S. President Johnson has decided to send in 50,000 more U.S. combat troops, raising the U.S. strength in South Vietnam to nearly 130,000; and a further dispatch has also been announced" "The 'unconditional discussions' proposal of the U.S. authorities is but an attempt to compel the Vietnamese people to accept their own terms" "...The 'cease-fire trick of the U.S, authorities is designed in fact to compel the Vietnamese people in both zones to lay down their arms while U.S. troops continue to be reinforced, to occupy and commit aggression against Vietnam. This is also an attempt to play for time to consolidate the puppet administration and army, to increase forces for further expansion . of the war in Vietnam11 (Vietnam Courier ArticleTab B3, pg. 1) "...Such allegations as peace, discussions put forth by the imperialists are but deceitful words. The U.S. imperialists have openly unleashed war against the DRV11 (Joint Asahi-Xainichi Interview with Phan Van Dong October 4, 1965Tab CC pp. 1-2, 7, 10) "...No, the United States is definitely not desiring peace. They have no intention at all of ending the warare they not expanding war in both the south and the north, while talking about peace? They still believe in power, and they think that if they further increase their forces and strengthen the bc.bir.gs against the north, they wi 11 produce effects. That is very foolish, but it happens to be the truth. That is why we co not trust their peace proposal. In the choice between accepting the Johnson proposal and continuing the war, we chose the course of continuing war without the slightest hesitation" ' "...The 127     "...The United States' escalation against the north has failed so far. Its greatest failure lies in its having been unable to bring -the north to the conference table by threatening its people!! "...President Johnson began io talk about peace negotiations half a year apo. However, whenever he spoke about peace, he ordered reinforcement of the U.S. forces in South Vistr.au. and "escalated" the war against North Vietnam" 128 .     EXCERPTS FROM SOUTH VIETNA-Q-SE NATXCNAL LIBERATION FRONT NORTH VIRTto-SE FATiERLtH FRONT JOINT STATEMENT OF OCTOBER 30, l?62 (The Joint Statement was issued on the occasion of a visit to Hanoi from October 19 to 31, 1962 of a NFLSV delegation led by Secretary General Nguyen Van Hieu. The Statement, broadcast in English by Hanoi's VRA on October 30, 19o2 accuses the U.S. and the Diem "clique"of violating the Geneva Agreements. It also states the Front, which came into being owing to the growth of the South Vietnamese, is the genuine representative of the South Vietnamese people. It calls for neutrality of South Vietnam, and for peaceful reunification.) "...1. Both parties note that over the past eight years or so the GENEVA Vietnamese people and the Governuent of the DRV constantly implemented correctly t?he 1954Geneva"Agreenents on Vietnam) but the U.S, imperialists have inter-fered more and more deeply in South Vietnam and directed the Ngo Dinh Diep authorities to seriously sabotage the. implementation of these agreements. The U.S. imperialists are plotting to partition Vietnam permahcntly, turn South Vietnam into a new type U.S. colony and military base...Over 10,000 U.S. officers and men and hundreds of thousands of Ngo Dinh Diem troops armed with modern U.S. weapons and noxious chemical are repeatedly conducting terrorist raids and barbarously persecuting the South Vietnamese people, regardless of age, sex, religion, nationality, or political tendency. Millions of South Vietnamese peasants have been herded by the U.S.-Diem clique into concentration camps, so-called strategic hamlets "The U.S. imperialists are also plotting to use South Vietnam as a base to sabotage the peace and neutrality of Cambodia and Laos, threaten peace in southeast Asia ar.d the world, and, at the same time, to make South Vietnam a proving ground for the suppression of the national liberation movement in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. "Both parties denounce to world public opinion the criminal U.S.-Diem schemes and acts, severely Condemn the aggressive and warlike policy of the U.S. imperialists and the antinational and antidemocratic policy of the Ngo Dinh Diem authorities, hangers-on of the United States. "2. In the face of the U.S. imperialists' aggressive acts and Ngo Dinh Diem's traitorous acts, the South Vietnamese people have been compelled to rise up to struggle for their right to live and for independence, democracy, GENEVA and peace. This is a just struggle, which conforms to the 1954 Geneva The Fatherland Front of North Vietnam is the replacement for the Viet Minh group. The Front organizes and coordinates all the mass organizations, the trade unions and the three political parties. (All members of the National Assembly are elected as members of the Fatherland Front.) All these organizations operate under the aegis of the Fatherland Front as well as independently. 129     By NWD Date 201 I agreements on Vietnam, to the principles of the U.N. Charter and the spirit of the 19551Bandung conference. This struggle is an integral part of the movements for national libcration ana peace in the world. Yet, in choir. special rcport to the cochairmen of the 1954 Geneva conference, the Indian and Canadian delegates to the International Commission have deliberately tuned into the U.S.-Diem allegation, misrepresenting the South Vietnamese people's just struggle as infiltration and subversion by the North. This is an offense to the sacred patriotism of the Vietnamese people. The Vietnamese people from North to South energetically objcct to it. I i FRONT "The Vietnam Fatherland Front holds that the NFLSV, which came into, being owing to the growth of the South Vietnamese people's struggle and which ralliTsbrbadTy the pat riot ic and'antx-UE S .'-Dieef forces in South Vietnam, is ; thcgcnuine representative of the peonle there, and is one of the decisive factors for their certain victory. The Vietnam Fatherland Front fully supports the program and the urgent steps advocated by the NFLSV to realize indepen-dcnce)democracy, improvement of the people Js living conditions, and peace and . ' neutrality in South Vietnam, in an advance ; 1 the peaceful reunification. of the fatherland. The pro-ram and urgent steps of the NFLSV meet the interestsand aspirations of the South Vietnamese people and conform to ths practical situation in South Vietnam at present  "3. ...The delegation of the NFLSV welcomes the policy of the Vietnam Fatherland Front for national reunification on the basis of independence, democracy, and by peaceful means, without coercion or annexation of one sidc . ' by the other, and taking into due consideration the legitimate interests and aspirations of the people of all shades in the tvro zones. This policy matches the political program of the NFLSV, which provides for reunifying the country step by step by peaceful means on the basis of negotiations bctween the two zones and discussions in all forms and measures beneficial to the Vietnamese ' people and fatherland1. "4. In the face of the present extremely serious situation in South Vietnam created by the U.S.-Diem (clique?) both parties hold .that the urgent DRV TERMS tasks of the pcople in both zones are to strengthen solidarity, resolutely !struggle against the U.S.-Dien (clique?) urgc an end to war and persecution, dissolve the "strategic hamlets11 and other concentration camps in South Vietnam, demand the dissolution of the U.S. Military Command in Saigon and the withdrawal of U.S, trocns, military personnel, arms, and war material frcm 'SouthVietnam. The U.S. Government must respect the sovereignty and indepen- dence of the South Vietnamese people. The latter's internal affairs must be "settled by themselves; no foreign country has the right to interfere in them.  Special report to the Co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference on Indo-China, issued in Saigon on June 2, 1962. 130      "Both sides hold that, at a time when the country is still temporarily divided it as a must to boost the struggle for normal relations between the . people of the zones in the economic, cultural, and postal fields. The Vietnam Fatherland Front and the NFLSV will strive to overcome difficulties, create favorable conditions for representatives of mass organizations of the two zones to contact each other, and at the same time, to exchange cultural articles of these mass organizations, such as films, books,and papers, "5. Both sides are very happy to note that the just struggle of South Vietnamese compatriots for the emancipation of South Vietnam and that of all the Vietnamese people for peaceful national reunification have won the active and warm approval and support of the world's peoplcs, including the progressive people in the United States, and the governments of many countries. On behalf, of the people of both zones, the two sides express thanks for that valuable support. "Both sides hold that the Vietnamese and the world's people have a common enemy, U.S. imperialism, the war-seeking diehard of the colonialists and imperialists. The ariti-U.S. struggle of the Vietnamese people and the struggle of peoples for national independence and peace are closely connected with each other. That is why both sides warmly welcome the peaceful settlement of the Laotian question and the formation of the National Union Government in Laos. The peaceful settlement of the Laotian issue proves that international disputes can be settled satisfactorilyby means of negotiations. Both sides demand the scrupulous respect for and strict implementation of the 1962 Geneva agreements on Laos, and the complete withdrawal from Laos of all military men of the United . States and its satellites. "The two sides protest against the infringement upon the sovereignty and territory of Cambodia by the South Vietnamese and Thai authorities on U.S. orders. They vzelcome the proposal of Head of State Prince Norodom Sihanouk for convening an international conference to discuss a guarantee of Cambodia's independence and neutrality. "The two sides demand a complete withdrawal of American troops from Thailand, and the dissolution of the aggressive SEATO military bloc headed by the United States. "Both sides support the struggle of the Chinese people to liberate Taiwan and oppose the scheme to create two Chinas, support the Chinese people in their defense of national sovereignty and territory, support the proposal of the CPR . Government for the settlement of the Sino-Indian border question by peaceful negotiations, and demand restoration of the legitimate position of the CPR in the United Nations. ' "6. The two sides unanimously hold that nowadays the world's people's forces of national independence ar.d peace are stronger than the aggressive and bellicose forces of the imperialists headed by the United States. No matter how small they are, the peoples are able to win if they are united closely and struggle valiantly. Though the U.S.-Dien clique still has many evil designs and the South Vietnamese compatriots' struggle is still difficult, hard, and . 131 .  .     long, no reactionary force can check the growth of the patriotic movement in South Vietnam. FRONT "The 14 million South Vietnamese compatriots will develop more and more.. their valiant and indomitable tradition and unite more and more v.idely and closely within the NFLSV to directly oppose the U.S.-Diem clique. The 16 mi 11 inn North Vietnamese compatriots will support more actively the South Vietnamese compatriots liberation struggle, and endeavor to emulate with each other to build North Vietnam into a strong and firm basis for the struggle to reunite the country. The socialist countries, the peaceful and neutral countries, the peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, and peace-loving people throughout the world will obviously support more wholeheartedly and practically (word indistinct) South Vietnamese and all the Vietnamese people. The U.S.-Diem clique will certainly meet vdth failure. The Vietnamese people from north to south who are closely united and w'no struggle resolutely, will undoubtedly achieve success." 132 .     FRONT HO CHI MINH'S INTER VEN WITH AKAHATA APRIL 5, I965 (Ho's interview with Yoshita Takano of Akahata, organ of the Joipanese Communist Party, was broadcast by Hanoi VNA in English on April 9, 1965. Ho expressed the view that to settle the South Vietnamese question first of all the U.S. must withdraw from South Vietnam, let the South Vietnamese people decide themselves their own affairs, and stop their provocative attacks against the DRV. "The carrying out of these basic points will bring about favorable conditions for a conference along the pattern of the 1954 Geneva conference. Such is a reasonable and sensible approach which is beneficial to peace and to the U.S. people.") "Question The U.S. impcrialists have suffered repeated defeats in South Vietnam However, they are still contemplating bringing in super-weapons, up-to-date vreapons in an attempt to subjugate the Vietnamese people. From the people's viewpoint what is the character of the war in Vietnam and what is its significance in contemporary history? The U.S. Imperialists are said to have landed themselves in an embarrassing dilemma in South Vietnam, What is the relation between this position and their recent frenzied aggressive acts vis-a-vis North and South Vietnam? In such circumstances, what is the most important immediate task of the Vietnamese people? OVES 'Answerf For over 10 years now, the U.S, imperialists have waged an aggressive war in South Vietnam in an attempt to turn that zone into a U.S. new-type colony and military base and to prolong the partition of our country. They Have brought in over 30,000 troops and military personnel, thousands of aircraft, hundreds of warships and hundreds of thousands of tons of arms, they have carried out a most ruthless policy of terror and repression against all patriotic people in South Vietnam. "Confronted with such a situation, our compatriots in the south have, had, to rise un a-ainst the U.S, aggressors in defense of their life and their country. This struggle has recorded tremendous victories. Over three-quarters of the area with two-thirds of the population have been liberated. The United States and its agents have sustained heavy, defeats. The U.S. special war in South Vietnam is going bankrupt. "If the South Vietnamese people are becoming every stronger and winning ever greater victories, as the fight goes on, that (proves that?) their cause is just, because they are animated with an ardent patriotism and guided by the sound policy of the NFLSV. The war being waged by our. compatriots in the south is a peoples revolutionary war against foreign aggression, for national independence and peace. It is an active part of the world peoples movement against ..imperialism, colonialism, and neocolonialism, headed by U.S. imperialism, for national independence, democracy, peace, and social progress. 133      That is precisely the reason why the peoples of the whole world are extending us their sympathy and support. The increasing victories of the South Vietnamese people show that in our epoch, a nation closely united and waging a resolute struggle is fully capable of defeating the imperialist aggressors, however ferocious, cruel, and well armed they may be. US MOVES GENEVA US MOVES "In an attempt to extricate themselves from their impasse, the U.S, imperialists are feverishly intensify!.- and stepping up the aggressive v.'ar in South Vietnam. They have brought in U.S. marines and South Korean mercenaries, their planes arc daily strafing and dumpting napalm bombs and toxic gas on liberated areas, destroying hospitals, schools, and pagodas, and massacring the civilian population including old people, women, and children. On the othcr hand, the war is beine carried to the north with repeated air and naval attacks being brazenly launched on many places of the territory of the DRV. Meanwhile the war is intensified in Laos and provocations are stageo. against" Cambodia. The U.S, imperialists1 acts of aarression and war in Vietnam arc of the utmost gravity; they grossly trample upon the 1954 Geneva agreements on VietnITand constitute violations of international law and manifestations of disregard for world public opinion. "The U.S. rulers claim that the north is waging aggression on South Vietnam and that their attacks on the north aim at putting an end to the assistance extended by the north to the South Vietnamese people. These are deceitful contentions designed to fool the world's peoples and to cover up the U.S. aggressive acts. It must be pointed out that it is the legitimate right of the South Vietnamese people to drive out the U.S. aggressors, to defend their country and to decide themselves their own international affairs. It is the sacred right of the Vietnamese in the north as well as in the south to oppose and defeat the U.S. imperialists' aggressive acts to defend their national independence and their life. The U.S. imperialists' acts, however frenzied and reckless they may be, cannot prevent the Vietnamese people,from carrying on their patriotic struggle until final victory. "Question There is now much talk about a peaceful settlement and negotiations., to end the war in South Vietnam. What is in your view the minimum basis for the settlament of the Vietnam problem? 11 Answer Of late, the U.S, imperialists have put forward misleading talk about peace and negotiation. The peoples of the world are fully aware of their aggressive and warlike nature. To step up aggression inSouth Vietnam and to 'bomb the north are part of their policy of special, vrariare. By such acts, they also aim at bringing about an advantageous position so as to be able, in case ofnecessity. to negotiate from a position of stren th.This policy is wrong and cannot be carried out. % "The Vietnamese people cherish peace and have always respected and correctly implemented the 1954 Geneva agreements. However, they are determined to fight to the end against the aggressors. If the U.S. imperialists stubbornly persistin their policy of aggression and war, they will certainly suffer a humiliating defeat. 134 .     T  TERMS "To settle the South Vietnam question, first of all the United States must withdraw from South Vietnam, let- the South Vietnamese. peopleRhcaselves dqcidclheiIowmRffairs.and stopits provqc.ative o-ttack .DRV, The carryinc out of these basic points will brin-- about favorable conditions GENEVA for a conference along the pattern of the 1954 Genova conference. Such is a reasonable and sensible approach which isQencffciaI to -peace and to' tne U.S. nccolc. "Question What is your appraisal of the Indochinese peoples' conference recently held in Phnom Penh? "Answer The Indochinese peoples' conference convened at the initiative of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the Cambodian head of state, has recorded good successes. This is a big victory for the peoples of Vietna, Cambodia, and Laos in their united struggle against their common enemy, the U.S. imperialists. While the United States is stepping up and expanding the aggressive war in South Vietnam, attacking the DRV, intensifying the war in Laos, and repeatedly ' encroaching on the territory and national sovereignty of Cambodia, the success of the conference shows the determination of the three Indochinese peoples to fight against the U.S. imperialists in defense of national independence and peace in Indochina and southeast Asia. "Question Of late, the U.S. imperialists have schemed to direct the re-actionary and militarist Japanese administration to rapidly conclude the Japan-ROK talks. They also plan to set up the SEATO aggressive military bloc. This is directly related to their aggressive acts in South Vietnam. What are your assessments of the dangerous designs and activities of the U.S. and Japanese reactionary forces on Japanese soil and of the Japanese peoples struggle against these dangerous schemes and acts? 11 Answer The Japan-ROK talks are a maneuver of the U.S. imperialists aimed at establishing the SEATO aggressive military bloc and intensifying war preparations. This maneuver is in complete contradiction with the interests of the Japanese and Korean peoples and poses a threat to peace in the Far East and the world. The U.S. imperialists who are the aggressors in South Vietnam are also occupying the Japanese islands of Okinawa and Ogasawara and occupying South Korea. The Japanese militarists who have colluded with the United States and repressed the Japanese people have also sent sailors and technicians to help the United States in South Vietnam and allowed Japanese territory to bo used as a base for aggression against South Vietnam. The U.S, imperialists are the common enemy of the peoples of Vietnam, Japan, and Korea. The same may be said of the Japanese militarists and the South Korean puppets. The Vietnamese people fully support the struggle of the Japanese people against the Japan-ROK talks and the reactionary policy of the U.S. imperialists and Japanese militarists. They sincerely thank the Japanese people for warmly supporting their struggle against the U.S. aggressors, "I take this opportunity to convey my cordial greetings to the editorial board of AKAHATA and request your paper to convey to the fraternal Japanese people the greetings of militant solidarity of the Vietnamese people." 135 .     REPORT OF THE DRV GOVERNMENT SUBMITTED BY PHAM VAN DONG TO THE DRV NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ON APRIL 8, 1965 ' (The first section of this report was broadcast by Hanoi VNA in English on April 12, 1965. The concluding section containing Pham Van Dong's four points was translated by FBIS from a Hanoi domestic broadcast on April 13. The four points and other pertinent excerpts from the report are included below. The report contains a lengthy indictment against U.S. activities in South Vietnam as well as a report on conditions in North Vietnam.) "...The unswerving policy of the DRV Government is to respect strictly the 1-954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam and to implement correctly their basic provisions as embodied in the following points 4 POINTS "1. Recognition of the basic national rights of the Vietnamese peopTee'peace, mdepenaence,"sovereignty, unity7andtcrriioi;'iaTir1tegrity. According to the Geneva agreements, the U.S. Government must withdravz from South Vietnam U.S, troops, military personnel, and weapons of all kinds, dismantle all U.S. military bases there, and cancel its military alliance with South Vietnam. Iu must endVits policy ofinterventxon and?aggression in South Vietnam. According to the Geneva agreements, the U.S. Government must stop its ' acts oFwar against North Vietnam andccmniLetely cease all encroachments on the territory and sovereignty of the DRV. I . "2. Pending the peaceful reunification of Vietnam, while Vietnam is still temporarily divided into two zones the military provisions of the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam must be strictly respected. The two zones must refrain "from entering into any military alliance vrith foreign countries and there musheno foreign military bases, troops, or military personnel in their" respective territory. "3. The internal affairs of South Vietnam must be settled by the South Vietnamese people themselves m accordance vrith the program of the NFLSV without any foreign interference. "4 The peaceful reunification of Vietnam is to be settled by the Vietnamese people in both zones, without any foreign interference. "This stand of the DRV Government unquestionably enjoys the approval and support of all peace and justice-loving governments and peoples in the world. The government of the DRV is of the view that the stand expounded here is the basis for the soundest nolitical settlement of the Vietnam problea. i GENEVA "Ifthls b5-5!5 Is recognised, favorable conditions will be created for the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam people, and it wfTlbcp6ssiEle to consider the reconvening of an international conference along the pattern of the 1954 -Geneva conference on Vietnan. "The DRV Government declares that any approach contrary to the aforementiors . r;  ' " .- 136      UN GENEVA US MOVES stand is inappropriate; any apnrcach tendin' to secure U.N. intervention in the Vietnam situation is also inappropriate. Such approaches are basically, at variancetith the l93NCeneva agreements on Vietnam.,. 77 ' "We believe the world's people were awakencd on hearing President Johnson speak of a return to the1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam. This was. a laur-'nt"Everyone knows the U.S, imperialists are the enemy of the Geneva agreements. Never have they and their Saigon henchmen officially recognized these agreements. Worse still, they have never officially recognized the ICG's execution of the Geneva agreements. At this very moment they are down-trodding the Geneva agreements more bra?.only than ever. The U.S, imperialists have never respected the 1954 Geneva agreements on Cambodia and the 1954. and 1962 Geneva agreements on Laos. At present, they persistently refuse to reconvene the internationci conference on Cambodia and Laos. Today, the U.S, imperialists are obliged to refer to the Geneva agreements on"Vietnam but with theaim of distorting the basic principles of the a.<rcements in order to perpetuate our country's division and to consider the north and the south as two entirely different nations. "As for our government and people, they have continuously struggled to maintain the Geneva agreements on Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia and considered these agreements as a legal basis for the sacred and inviolable national interests of the people of the three friendly countries. "President Johnson's 7 April speech is full, of irreconcilable contradictions between the deceitful words and the criminal acts of the U.S. Government in Vietnam. US MOVES "1. In his speech, President Johnson spoke of peace, the end of the war, and unconditional negotiations, however, the 9,S. government is now intensifying the aggressive war in South Vietnam and extending the war to North Vietnam, and according to General Taylor's statement, there will be no limit to the aggression against North Vietnam. "2. President Johnson spoke a lot about South Vietnam's independence South Vietnam will not be bound to any foreign intervention or bound to any alliance and will not allow any country to set up its military base there. However, it is the U.S. imperialists who are seeking at all risks to cling to South Vietnam and have increased the number of U.S. combat units in South Vietnam and the number of aggressive acts against North Vietnam in an attempt 'to cling to South Vietnam. It is crystal clear that the U.S. Government is waging this aggressive war against South Vietnam, but it has brazenly accused Morth Vietnam of being the aggressor. President Johnson stated in his speech that "we will not withdraw publicly or under any (word indistinct) agreement." This brazen statement has completely, laid bare the U.S. policy on Vietna. It is a threat to world public opinion. "3. PresidedV1Q.hnsoalsmtejidedtocni development and, the improvement 01 other people's liyelinooa wjtn tne am Ox      1 billion dollars, but his purpose was to woo the southeast Asian peoples. The U.S. imperialists are really the creators of all danger of war in Vietnam, Laos, and other places. They have committed considerable criminal acts and have even used toxic gas not only in the war, but in the repression of anti-U.S. people in the urban centers. >'4, President Johnson threatened to continue the use of force. This threat cannot frighten us. The Vietnamese people are determined to fight and win. They are not afraid of any difficulty or enemy. As they arc suffering defeats, the U.S. imperialists will certainly be defcated completely. As the U.S. Government has been urged by public opinion the world over and in the United States to withdraw its troops from South Vietnam and put an end to the war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, President Johnson was obliged to utter demagogic words, and these were only maneuvers or tricks aimed at deceiving public opinion and appeasing the increasingly widespread and vigorous < opposition in the United States and the world over to the war of aggression in Vietnam. "So, our Vietnamese people and the world's peoplc must heighten their vigilance against the U.S. imperialists' new acts of war and, at the same time, against their deceitful, move to intensify the war under the label of peace and negotiations and to slander other people as warmongers US MOVES "The NFLSV, the mobilizer and organizer of the patriotic forces in South yietnam7the leader whfcn has talcerTthe people to ever greater victories, is now controlling three-fourths of the territory and two-thirds of the uo-ouiation of South Vietnam. It has ever higher international nrestige and position, and is being more and more recognized by foreign countries and world nublic opinion as thesole genuine representative of the South Vietnamese people. "Its sound program constitutes the banner of unity and struggle for national salvation.. .with a view to achieving independence, democracy, peace, and neutrality in South Vietnam, and eventual peaceful reunification of the country. The statement of 22 March 1965 of the front is resounding in the world as the strong voice of a people determined to fight and to win, the voice of justice, the voice of the just cause of the Vietnamese people and of the present epoch "The Government of the DRV sternly exposes and denounces to compatriots in the whole country and to the peoples of the world the new, extremely serious war acts of the U.S. imperialists on the one hand the latter are intensifying the aggressive war in the South, and on the other they are launching air arid naval attacks on the northUS MOVES Ey engaging in this highly dangerous military adventure, they stupidly hone to cow our neonle and also inuinidate peace-loving governments and peoples in the world.They hope that our people and the peoples of the world will flinch out of fear, and thus they will be in a position to shift frem a weak to astrong position. 138 .     "But in the facc of their new aggressive acts, the Vietnamese people from the south to the north are waging an all the more resolute struggle, and the world's peoples are extending us an all the more vigorous support. It is clear that still heavier defeats are in store for the U.S. imperialists "Ten years ago the French Expeditionary Corps, in spite of its 200,000 crack troops, ended in defeat at Dien Bien Phu. A U.S. expeditionary corps will inevitably meet with the same ignominious fate in South Vietnam. For their part, our southern compatriots are prepared to fight with determination, to fight to the end, and to fight until not a single U.S. soldier is any longer to be seen in our country, even if they will have to fight for 10 or 20 years or more, and however great their difficulties and hardships may be (22 March 1965 statement of the NFLSV). 'While intensifying the aggressive war in South Vietnam, the U.S. imperialists are expanding it to the North with their air force on the grounds that the DRV is at the origin of the patriotic struggle in South Vietnam. These are obviously impudent acts and perfidous tricks of corsairs ' GENEVA "Bv attacking the DRV they have completely scrapped the Geneva agreements and grossly violated international lce.-r and all human laws. They must pay for their crimes "The entire people of the north, united as one, are determined to struggle in a self-sacrificing spirit to defeat all enemy aggressive schemes, to defend the north, and, more closely than ever, to stand side by side with our southern compatriots and wholeheartedly support their liberation struggle till final victory. "In laying hands on the north, the U.S. warmongers expose themselves not only to well-deserved counterblows in the north, but also to still more telling blows in the south, as was pointed out in the 22 March 1965 statement of the liberation front "To defend the beloved north, the army and people of the south have vented their flames of anger at the U.S. aggressors and their agents. If the U.S. imperialists lay hands on the north of our fatherland once, the army and people of the south ; are resolved to strike twice or three times as hard at them... t "In these circumstances, the more frenzied the United States attempts to . extend the war to North Vietnam, the more disastrous will be their defeat! An anti-U.S. wave of indignation is now surging up in the world. The governments and people of the socialist countries, nationalist countries, international organizations, peoples the world over, and progressive circles and various social strata in the United States itself are extending an ever more resolute i and vigorous support and assistance to our just struggle... "Today we are much stronger than before, strong in the north, strong in the south, and strong in worldwide support. For their part the U.S. imperialists are 139 9 .     being bogged down in South Vietnam and encountering great difficulties in various fields in many places. That is why our people are all the more heightening their will and determination, are animated with even greater enthusiasm and confidence in their just and certainly victorious struggle, and are resolved to devote all their forces to drive the U.S. aggressors out of our country, to defend the north, to liberate the south, to eventually build a peaceful, reunified, independent, democratic, and prosperous Vietnam, and to contribute to the defense of peace in southeast Asia and the world FRONT "The whole people of the north are warmly responding to the statement ' of thc NFLSV. and the.stp.tcT.cnt of the Vietnam Fatherland Front, they are simultaneously carrying out production, fighting, and combat preparations, determined as they are to do their best to build and defend the north and to extend vrholehearted support to the cause of the liberation of the south. In the present juncture, all social strata and all citizens must work more with a higher sense or urgency and higher productivity. Everybody must, according to . his capacity and strength, matte his most effective contribution to the common cause of the country. "In response to the .anneal of the NFLSV,the South Vietnamese .cadres, armymen, and ordinary citizens regrouped to the north have enthusiastically ! 'voiced their readiness to return to their native land and to fight, arms in hand, or to do any work to contribute to the annihilation of the enemy and to national salvation. Pending orders to this effect, all of then are striving ' "with one mind" to "boost UP production and ac'Fivel'y'work'' to Contribute' to the defense and the building of the north. We warmly hail their patriotism and ToinbatTrcdincss!... ' "In the process of production and fighting, the administration in the north will be ever more consolidated and ever stronger. The northern part of our country, the DRV, will bring into play its great impact as the base for the liberation of South Vietnam and the peaceful reunification of the fatherland US MOVES "What causes us to be moved and enthusiastic is that in recent months, in the United States itself, a movement has been developing widely to oppose the U,S. imperialists who are stepping uo the war of aggression inSouth Vietnam and increasing their acts of war against North Vietnam. This-movement includes a  great numbers of American people from all walks of life workers, youth, women, students, intellectuals, religious people, congressmen, and journalists. The struggle forms have gradually become stronger and more abundant 'Dear comrade deputies of the National Assembly, the anti-U.S. struggle of our people has received never-before-seen sympathy and wide support from the people in the world, from fraternal socialist countries to people from all walks of life of various Western countries, including the United States. This is an event having an international meaning of great importance "We must carry out this task properly because the U.S, imperialists continuously seek all means to deceive world opinion ar.d to sow confusion concerning problems (several words indistinct). 'Worse still, they are so 140 .     crafty as to try to (wipe out?) and to change black into white. For example they saythey have to eomand the war to the north because the DRV has caused the liberation war in the south. "We must unmask the U.S. aggressors in time and vigorously and sharply because they are used to stealing while crying for help. Wc must awaken the vrorld's people to these dishonest tricks of the U.S. bandits. Care must be taken when they speak of love and justice because they surely want to get in a house without having to break down the door."...- 141      VIA "AUTHORIZED" STATE ENT REJECTING THE 17 NON-ALIGNED HT1ON APPEAL (VILA broadcast a statement A.nril 19, 1965 in English which it had been "authorized" to issue rejecting the 1) Non-Aligned Nation appeal passed at the Belgrade meeting of non-aligned countries on March 15, 1965 The "authorization" presumably was by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.) 11.. .The NFISy. is., now controlling .tlm.e.e-f.o.urthsofSo.uthVietnams territor?r and two-thirds, of its nonulation.Jt, is clear that at th? FRONT present time any solution tp the South Vietnam issue without the decisive .voic.c.nf.,.the..j .impractical... "To soothe and mislead public opinion, on 7. April.. 19.65,, .U S., President Lyndon Johnson spoke of peace and independence in South Vietnam,p unconditional negotiations toward a political solutionis the war in South US MOVES ' Vietnam) He even promised tq set aside 1 billion dollars to deye1op the economy and raipe the 1ivingstandard of the peoples in southeast Asian countries'. But in this very speech, Johnson.declared 'that' the Uni ted States vilVnot withdraw from South Vietnam and will intensify its air raids against North Vietnam"In point of fact, since 7 April 1965, the U.S. imperialists have introduced into South Vietnam two more battalions of U.S. Marines totaling 3,000 men and a large quantity of modern weapons. American aircraft have continually bombed many towns and villages, sowing so much mourning and devastation in both South and North Vietnam. It is clear that Johnsons speech is but a smokescreen to cover up the U.S. imperialists new military adventures in Vietnam, directly jeopardizing peace and security of the peoples in this area. "To settle the Vietnam problem at present, the only correct way is to 4 POINTS carry out the points laid down by DRV Premier Pham Van Dong on 8 April 1965 "It is the unswerving policy of the DRV Government to strictly resnect the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam and to correctly implement theirbasic provisions as embodied in the foliowins points . "1. Recognition of the basic national rights of the Vietnamese people peace, independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity. According to the Geneva agreements, the U.S. Government must withdraw from South Vietnam al 1 U.S. troops, military personnel, and weapons of all kinds, dismantle all U.S. military bases there, canc'el its military alliance with South Vietnam. It must end its policy of intervention and aggression in South Vietnam. According to the Geneva agreements, the U.S. Government must stop its acts of war against North Vietnam, completely cease all encroachments on the territory and sovereignty of the DRV.      "2. Pending the peaceful reunification of Vietnam, while Vietnam is still temporarily divided into two zones, the military provisions of the 1954 Gcncva agreements on Vietnam must be strictly respected (while?) the two zones must refrain from joining any military alliance with foreign countries; there must be no foreign military bases, troops, and military personnel in their respective territory. "3. The internal affairs of South Vietnam must be settled by the South Vietnamese people themselves in accordance with the NFLSV program, without any foreign interference. "4. The peaceful reunification of Vietnam is to be settled by the Vietnamcse people in both zones, without any foreign interference. "This stand unquestionably' enjoys the approval and support of all peace- and justice-loving governments and peoples in the world. "The DRV Government is of the '.lew that the above-expounded stand is 4 POINTS the basis for the soundest political settlement of the Vietnam problem. Tf this basis is recognized, favorable conditions trill be creatod for the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam problem and it will bc possible to consider the reconvening of an international conference in the pattern of the 1954 Geneva conference on Vietnam. "The DRV Government declares that any approach contrary to the above stand is inappropriate; any approach tending to secure a U.H. intervention in the Vietnam situation is also inappropriate, because such approaches are UH basically at variance with the 1954 Gcncva agreements on Vietnam. ' "Among the 17 countries which sent representatives to the meeting held ' in Belgrade on 15 March 1965, some did not sign the appeal issued by this meeting. Others, who signed it because they wcre not accurately informed about the bloody war provoked in South Vietnam by the U.S. imperialists and the latters piratical attacks against the DRV, have now shown unwillingness to support that appeal"     NHAN DAN EDITORIAL, APRIL 21, 1965,ON THE NFLSV AS THE ONLY GENU I RlmSliNTATllt OF THE SOUTH VIETNAMESE PEOPLE (The Nhan Dan editorial marks a strengthening of the DRV characterization of the NFLSV role in South Vietnam, marking it out as the "only'genuine representative" of the South Vietnamese people which must have "its decisive voice." The following extracts from the editorial were broadcast in English by Hanoi Radio April 21, 1965.) FRONT "From a place in the liberated area in South Vietnam, on 22 March 1965 the epic statement of the NFLSV Central Committee was broadcast all over the world. Within only a month, this appeal for national salvation has rapidly won a broad and powerful response throughout Vietnam. In the world, the voice of thc NFLSV is the decisive one in the settlement of the South Vietnam quest io ntone of the most important questions at present on which all of mankind is focusing its attention. 'With its just cause of national liberation and its correct line of resistance for national salvation, thc NFLSV has continually led the South Vietnamese people from one victory to. another. At present, over three-fourths oftheIerrit0.! and two-thirds of the So31thVietnamesepppulationshavebeen liberated The front has actually become the organizer and guide of all facets of the life of the 9 million people in the liberated areas, while the people in areas under the temporary control of the enemy are constantly turning their thoughts to thc front and responding to and carrying out all its policies. The fronts prestige in the world is growing daily. The front and thc mass organizations affiliated with it have established relations with hundreds of international and national organizations in the world. It has set up representative organs in many countries in Asia, Europe, Africa, and Iatin America. The front's Central Committee has regularly exchanged letters and messages with the governments and state leaders of many countries. "The foundation day of the front, 20 December, has beecue one of the anniversaries to which progressive people and political circles in many countries are praying great importance. On the rostrums of various inter-national conferences of mass organizations, the voice of the front's delegates is regarded by all as that of a valiant fighter on the front line against U.S, imperialism. The NFLSV representative attended the Indochinese people's conference last February and the recent 10th anniversary of the Bandung con--ference as the only genuine representative of the heroic South Vietnernese people. "Faced with the great prestige of the NFLSV, the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys are extremely frightened. In an attempt to overshadow the front's role, the U.S. aggressors have endeavored to doll up the Saigon puppet administration. But they will never be able to achieve their goal. Chairman A. N. Kos?gin declared Today everybody must see that the NFLSV, which i.s leadin the South Vietnamese people's struggle, is a reel force which decides the present as well as the future of South VietnamPremier Chou En-lai h-e on m any occasions asset ted that the NFLSV is the only legal representative 144 .     of the South Vietnam population, and the Chinese people firmly- respond to The-22'March statement of the NFLSV and will send to the South Vietnamese people all material aid to defeat U.S. impcrialism. President Sukarno has very correctly remarked that nobody regards the Saigon regime as a government. It is the United States which is occupying Saigon. "The role and mission of the NFLSV have been entrusted by history and recognized by all the Vietnamese people and people all over the world. Just as the NFISV Ccntral Committee declared in its communiqueof 15.April,any settlement of the South Vietnam questionwi11lose .itspracticalandpositive meaning if itisundertaken without the..paEtic.inatiQnoJEth decisive role. l . "The U.S. imperialists and their lackeys are stubbornly intcnsifying and expanding their war of aggression in South Vietnam. They will certainly . receive more telling blows from the NFLSV and the 14 million South Vietnamese  people. The front has clearly defined its stand  "The South Vietnamese people and their armed forces are resolved never to relax their grip on their arms so long as they have not reached their goals independence, democracy, peace, and neutrality..., and all negoti-atiqns. with the U.S, imperialists at this moment are entirely useless if they FRONT still refuse to withdraw from South Vietnamall their troops and.allkinds . of war materiel and means -- and thpseof the satellites -- if they still do not dismantle all their military bases in South Vietnam, if the traitors still surrender the South Vietnamese people's sacredrights to independence and democracy to the U.S, imperialists, and if the NFISV the only genuine representative of the 14 million South Vietnamese peopledoes not have its decisive voice.11 .     DRV "WHITE PAPER" ON "US AGGRESSION AND INTERVENTION IN VIETNAM" ' (On July 10, 1965 North Vietnam released a "White Paper" on "US Aggression and Intervention in Vietnam which had been prepared by the DRV Foreign Ministry. The timing of release of the white paper was related to the 11th anniversary of the signing of the Geneva Agreements on Vietnam on July 20, 1954, but the paper itself was prepared in May, 1965. The full text of the paper was released by Hanoi VIIA. in English July 16. The white paper is divided into six chapters1 First US intervention in Vietnam. 2 Second US intervention in Vietnam, systematic sabotage of the 1954 Geneva agreements. 3 US armed aggression against South Vietnam. 4The United States launched air and naval attacks on the DRV. 5 The so-called will for peace of the aggressors. 6 The sound basis for a settlement of the Vietnam problem. I Excerpts from chapters two, three, four and five and the full text of chapter six are given below.) i .. Chapter 2 "...The U.S. policy of intervention has trampled upon the deep aspirations of the people of South Vietnam and of all Vietnam for peace, unity, . independence, and democracy. Even the rights to life and peaceful labor have not been respected by the ruthless fascist dictatorial policies of the Ngo Dinh Diem administration. Therefore, exercising their rights of selfdefense and self-determination which are the inalienable rights of all peoples the undaunted South Vietnam people have resolutely risen up against the U.S. imperialists and their agents. i "The patriotic movement in South Vietnam has rapidly developed into a nightly tidal wave which threatens to sweep away the positions of the . United States and its agents. Once again the U.S. policy of intervention in South Vietnam has sustained disastrous failure..." Chapter 3 "But the heroic South Vietnam people have risen up in arms, against the 1 GENEVA aggressors for national salvation and self-liberation. Theirs is a thorouFnl just struggle which fully conforms to the. 1954- Geneva agreements..and to international law. The NFLSV, founded on 20 December 1960, more and more clearly proves . FRONT to be the sole genuine representative of the people, the .mobilizer and . organizer of all patriotic forces in South Vietnam. Born in the midst of the anti-U.S.-Die.m upsurge, the NFLSV, with Lawyer Ngueyn Huu Tho as its' 146      president, unitesall social strata, classes, nationalities, political pa r t i e s ,p r gar i s a tip n s, religious groups, and patriotic ponsonalitics, irrespective of political tendency,. to. fight, and overthrow.the.ruleof the LWS.Imperialists and their, agents, achieve-independence, democracy, better living conditions, oe?.cejand neu tralityforSouth...Vietnamand oycntua1.o reunification. "The front has succeeded in rallying oven broader patriotic forces to the struggle against the U.S. imperialists and their South Vietnam agents. Our southern compatriots, who enjoy the broad sympathy and vigorous support of the peoples of the socialist countries and peaceloving people throughout the world, have scored increasing victories. To date, the NFLSV has gained control of four-fifths of the.territory. and 10 million people; that is, two-thirds of thepopulationin.South Vietnam. It has become a powerful force which has a decisiye voice.in eSou t hVi e t nam or obi em. "The front is enjoying growing prestige in the world. It has successively established official representations in Cuba, Algeria, the GDR, Czechoslovakia, Indonesia, China, and the Soviet Union. It has also established a permanent representation to the Afro-Asian Peoples Solidarity Council in Cairo and a permanent observer near the executive committee of the International Union of Students in Budapest. "Its delegation have been warmly welcomed to various international conferences, where they were regarded as the genuine representatives of the South Vietnam people. In particular, three major international con- ferences were recently held to express the world peoples full support for the patriotic movement in South Vietnam. They are the meeting of ' the International Trade Union Committee for Solidarity With the Workers and People of South Vietnam, held in Hanoi at the end of October 196); the International Conference for Solidarity With the People of Vietnam Against U.S. Imperialist Aggression and for the defense of peace, held in Hanoi in November 1964; and the Indochinese People's Conference held , early in March 1965 in Phnom Penh. Committees for solidarity with the South Vietnam people are being set up in an increasing number of countries..." Chapter 4 i "The question no longer is whether war is being lost, but how fast the United States and South Vietnam are losing it and.whether there still is any flimsy hope of saving the situation. US MOVES "In an attempt to find a wav out of this crumbling position, the United States plots to extend the war beyond South Vietnam's borders. "Since early 1964- the U.S, ruling circles in washington have envisaged carrying the war to North Vietnam, Many plans have been mapped out by the U.S. strategists in the State Department and the Pentagon. Noteworthy  . 147  I .     is planNo. 6 worked out by Vfelt W. .Rostov, the.policy planner. ofthe U.S. State Department. This p1anenvisage.s.three.a.tagesfir.ststagei naval blockaof Haiphong port; second stage nava 1..attackgonNorth. Vietnam coastal installations; and third stage air bombingsofNorth... Vietnam... "These are cynical premcdiated war activities, brazen violations of the sovereignty and territory of the DRV, undeniable violations of the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam and all norms of international law. They pose a heavy threat to peace in Indochina and southeast Asia. That is the reason why the U.S. air and naval attacks on the territory of the DRV have been sternly condemned by the peoples of the whole world and by many governments... 3 "The U.S. Government has put forward one argument after another, and published a blue book and a white paper in an attempt to cover up its aggression in South Vietnam. "Since 7 April 1965 U.S. President Johnson has repeatedly stated that the United States has come to South Vietnam to defend freedom, to ' allow the people of South Vietnam to guide their own country in their own way. He also has accused North Vietnam of aggression against South Vietnam, and he has said that the United States is ready to engage in unconditional discussions to find a peaceful settlement of the war in Vietnam... "After the conclusion of the 1954 Geneva agreements, when Vietnam' was temporarily partitioned into two zones, the South Vietnam people longed to see South Vietnam achieve independence, democracy, peace and neutrality. But the United States had set up a fascist regime under the Ngo Dinh Diem brothers and, later on, under a succession of military dictators, it sabotaged the peaceful reunification of Vietnam as provided for in the Geneva agreements. It has brought into South Vietnam nearly 50,000 troops from the United States and thousands of mercenaries from a number of satellite countries to wage, together with the Saigon puppet army, an undeclared war, thus encroaching on the sovereignty and territory of Vietnam. It is crystal clear that the United States, instead of defending freedom, is carrying out an armed aggression in South Vietnam. It does not allow the people of South Vietnam to guide their own country in their own way, but is stifling their deepest and most sacred aspirations in an attempt to turn South Vietnam into a U.S. military base and new-type colony... "The South Vietnamese people have every right to rise up in arms against the U.S, aggressors and their lackeys to defend their country and their freedomand they are fully entitled to use all necessary means in accordance with their right of self-defense and self- tiqn, including an anneal to peace- and justice-loving countries formora1 support ..and ma.teria.l aid in ,theform of funds, weapons, and volunteers. 148      "Is it true that the United States is ready to engage, inunconditiona1 US MOVES discussions'with"a view to findin- a peaceful .settlementof .theconflic.t ' ' in Vietnam? . "It will be recalled that net long ago President Johnson demanded, as a precondition to any negotiations for a settlement of theSouth Vietnam question, that North Vietnam shou1dstop itsaggressi.na.gainst South Vietnam.  This time ho proposes unconditional! presumably because ne Marits to give better proof ofhiswill for peace, .andeven of his desire to raise the living standards of southeast Asian peoples. The U.S. ruling circles probably hope that Johnsons 7 April speech might mislead the worlds peoples into taking this as the sign of a change in U.S. policy. "Unfortunately, the 7 April specch is full of contraditions "It is a fact that U.S. puppet troops are fighting against the South Vietnam Liberation Anny and people which are led by the NFLSV. TbU.ni.t.ed States talks about itsdesire to hold discussion with a view to.finding FRONT a peaceful solution to the South Vietnam question, but it refuses to recognize the NFLSV as the sole genuine representative of the South Vietnam people, it is obvious that the United States wants neither peace nor 'negotiat io n. "The United States says that it wants a peaceful settlement of the v .OVES war Vietnam, but at the same time it deciares that it will not withdraw, either openly or under the cloak of a meaningless agreement. A peaceful settlement which does not include the withdrawal of U.S. satellite troops froriNSouth Vietnam cannot be regarded as such by sound-minded people. It only meansthat the United States, which has launced as armed aggression against South Vietnam, is insolently asking the heroic South Vietnam people to lay dorm their arms and surrender to those on whom they have inflicted defeat after defeat. This is the kind of negotiations from a position of strength repeatedly mentioned by the U.S. ruling circles, from Johnson to Deak Rusk and McNamara. But they should not have any illusions about it. The indomitable South Vietnam people deeply love peace, but they are determined to struggle against the U.S. imperialist aggressors; never will they lay down their arms until they win final victory. "The United States says tliat it wants to seek a peaceful settlement of the' warin Vietnam because it wants peace to be quickly restored, but it deems it necessary to increase its response and make attacks by air. While President Johnson says that the United States will strive not to extend the hostilities, Maxwell Taylor, the initiator of the theory of special war, who is now the plenipotentiary representative of the U.S. Government in South Vietnam for carrying out this kind of war, bluntly states that no limit exists to the potential escalation of the war, and that America may directly enter the ground fjghtine if necessary. 149      "while talking about peace, the United States continuetq Intensify US MOVES the war in South Vietnam and to extend the war with its air force and Tavy to North Vietnam. This may lead to unforeseeableconsequences. It Ts clear that the U.S. aggressors and warmongers are using double talk to . cover up their new dangerous military adventures in this area... "The aggressive and bellicose features of the U.S. Government are further laid bare by the following arrogant action On 24 April 1905 Pres ident Johnson designated the whole of'Vietnam and tTelTerldjacent theretoTp to 100 miles from the Vietnamese coasts, and part of the terri-Torial waters ..of the Chinese Peoples Republic around the Paracels Islands, yls a combat zone of the U.S, armed forces. This is in essence a move toward a blockage of the DRV and, at the same time, a preparation for arger Escale military adventures. .... .-- " "In fact, the United States is frenziedly intensifying the aggressive war in South Vietnam, stepping up the war of destruction with its air force against North Vietnam, and menacing the territorial waters of the DRV with its naval forces, in an attempt to turn defeat and weakness into victory and strength, get out of its present impass in South Vietnam, and obtain at the conference table what it cannot win on the battlefield. "The so-called will for peace and economic aid recently mentioned by Johnson are but familiar tricks of psychological warfare of the U.S. imperialists designed to soothe and deceive public opinion and cover up their attempt to extend the war and enslave the Indochinese and southeast Asian peoples. But such tricks, however perfidious, can fool no one. The U.S. milers know better than anyone else how many countries have courageously renounced the noose of U.S. aid and how many U.S. personnelcarrying out the Food for Peace and Alliance for Progress programs have been expelled from Asian, African, and Latin American countries." Chapter 6 "The South Vietnam Amy and'people, starting with almost-tare hands, have scored great achievements, recorded glorious victories, and driven "trie U.S. imperialists and their agents into a corner. In an attempt to retrieve this critical position, the U.S. imperialists are embarking on  new, extremely dangerious military adventures, thereby threatening peace in Indochina and southeast Asia more seriously than ever. I ' In its 22 March 1965 statement, the NFLSV Central Committee exposed rnOnT u.g, imperialists' policy of a accession and war demonstrated the inevit- ability of their defeat, and made clear its stand on the South Vietnam problem ----- "The South Vietnam people and their armed forces are resolved never to lose hold of their arms so long as they have not reached their basic ' goals, namely, independence, democracy, peace, and neutrality. The South Vietnam people aredetermined to go on striking'hard at the U.S. aggressors . 150     and their lackeys, and they are sure to win final victory. All negotiations at this moment are entirely useless if the U.S, imperialists still persist in refusing to withdraw from South Vietnam all their troops andl;ar materials of all kinds and those of their satellites, and to dsmantle all their milit?.ry bases in South Vietnam, if the Vietnamese traitors continue to surrender to the U.S, imperialists the South Viet- , namese people's sacred rihts to indcpendence, and if the NFLSV the only genuine representative of the 14- million South Vietnamese people --is not asked to say its decisive say. "All the Vietnamese people and the DRV Government warmly hail and support this correct stand of the NFLSV. "The DRV Government has always held that the correct implementation GENEVA of the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam is the correct way of settling the Souti Vietnam problem"On 8 Ap.il at the second session of the third National Assembly of the DRV, Premier Pham Van Dong once again made clear the position of . the DRV Government regarding the present situation in Vietnam. 4 POINTS "The unswerving policy of the DRV Government is to strictly respect the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam and to correctly imnlement their basic provisions as embodied in the following points See Pham Van Dongs 4 .points at Tab H- ' . "This stand unquestionably enjoys the approval and support of all peace- and justice-loving governments and people in the world. "The DRV Government holds that the above-mentioned stand is the basis for the soundest political settlement of the Vietnam problem. If this basis tis accepted, favorable conditions will be created for the, peaceful settle. ment of the Vietnam problem and it trill be possible to consider the recon- vening;of an international conference of the type of the 1954 Geneva con- . ,ference on Vietnam. "The Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam declares that UN any approach contrary to the above stand is irrelevant, any approach leading to a U.N. intervention in the Vietnam situation is also irrelevant, because gytch approahes are basically at variance with the 1954 Geneva agreements on VietnamHanoi, May 195 151      DRV GOVERHEim STATEMENT ON PRESIDENT JOI.SONS JUIY 28, 1965 PRESS 000110101 'STATQSuT (Following President Johnson's press conference Statement on July 28, the DRV issued a Government statement (on August 2) condemning the Statement but omitting any reference to the Presidents references to the DRV's "four points" or the NFL. The Statcment focused on criticism of the build-up of U.S. forces in South Vietnam and the continued U.S. bombing of North Vietnam. Following are excerpts from the English-language broadcast of the Statcment by Hanoi Radio.) "..In an attcmnt to dcceivc the American people and world public opinion and to justify the massive dispatch of U.S. troops for intensified agression "in Vietnam, TiTin Kosilent'JohnsonnaF'rcsorteCDto such nice words' as defending peace, freedom, justice He has reiterated his contention about unconditional " discussion and claimed himself to be ready to move from the battlefield to the conference table. "This hypocritical talk cannot possibly cover up and distort the truth. US MVrSn fact, the U.S. Government has sabotaged the 1954 Geneva agreements on  ' Vietnam, trampled upon internationallaws, continuously intervened in the internal affairs ofhe Vietnamesepeople, sent U,S.troop again?tthsSouth Vietnamese people, bombed and strafed the territory of the DRV, and has-gone to the length of bluntly stating that it will not withdraw from South Vietnam-.1 ,117 II -IWJ r ir-piu J--1 -l.j IJ- It 1 r 1.R  "It is also a fact that the U.S. Government is waging a war of aggression in Vietnam. It is talking about peace discussions to conceal the plan for 1ntcnsificdvar. Its design is to nrolon.'; indefinite!? the partition of Vietnam and to stick to South Vietnam in a bid to turn that zone into a U.S. new type colony and military base for attack.against the DRV, thus jeopardizing peace in Asia and the world "The DRV Government once again exposes the UMM authorities deception of unconditional discussions, which is in essence a perfidious maneuverto impose by force-on the Vietnamese people submission to the U.S, p'olicti of aSEression.. "The DRV Government solemnly declares that Vietnam is one, the Vietnamese people are one. The U.S. imperialists having encroached on Vietnamese territory, every Vietnamese is duty-bound to fight against the U.S. aggressors for national salvation. This is an imprescriptible sacred right of the Vietnamese people. The Vietnamese people, millions as one, are determined to stand firm on the frontline of the world peoples struggle against imperialism, colonialism, and neocolonialism for peace, national independence, democracy, and social progress." 152     By NWD Dale 2011 "Even if the U.S. imperialists send in 100,000 or 200,000-or more American troops, even if the struggle is to last 10, 20 years, or more, The Vietnamese people are determined to fight until complete victory. r "This stand as well as the 22 March 1965 statement by the NFLSV have elicted warm approval and support from many governments and from the world's people. "For theU.S. Government there is only one way to an honorable peace; h POINTS that .is)te. e9ire9.tlylmPl9ment the 19.?C?.n.eve a-rcementsosVictnam and accept the four-point stand of the DRV Government. ... "The U,S, Government mugt stop at .once itsair war .a-gainst thDRV and completely cease all encroachments on the sovereignty and security of the IftN It must nut an immediate end to the aerressive war in. Sou th Vietnam, withdraw all U.S. troousjand Weapons therefrom, and letthe South.Vietr.lames eFRONT pebple"settle their o-.maffairs inaccordance with the program, of theNFLSV--tne only genuine representative of the South Vietnamese people. "Thcre is no other way, not even the resorting to U.N. intervention. UN in Vietnam. .-.. "U.S. President Johnson has spoken about an honorable peace. It will . be recalled that all along for the past 11 years the Government of the DRV has repeatedly put forward reasonable and sensible proposals with a view to achieving a peaceful settlement of the Vietnam problem on the basis of the 1954 Geneva agreements. "More recently, on 8 April 1965, it made clear its four-noint stand 4.POINTS as a basis for the soundest political settlement of the Vietnam problem." 153 .     . EE MONDE INTERVIEW WITH HO CHI MINH (On August 15, 1965 Hanoi broadcast in English the text of Ho Chi Minh's responses to four questions submitted in . writing by French correspondent for Le Monde, Philippe Devillers. Ho insisted that the US must give "tangible proofs "that- it accepted the DRV's "four points" and appeared to completely rule out any role for the GVN in any . negotiations.) "Question Does the position of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam remain that which was defined by Premier Pham Van Dong on 8 April, namely the South Vietnamese people must be left to solve their own affairs themselves without foreign interference and on democratic bases? . "Answer That's right, and this cn the basis of the program of theNFISV,t;he FRONT some authentic,representative of the.South Vietnam peopleQuestion Is the Democratic Republic of Vietnam ready to accept, so long as the South Vietnamese people will so desire, the existence of an autonomous South Vietnam, neutral of course, but disposed to establish with the north the relations implied by fraternity and a common nationality? "Answer Of course, Along with preparations for the national reunification of Vietnam which will be carried pyd throuohpcaceful means, on the basis of the ' free consent of the north and the south, according to the program of the NrTSV.and"the program.ofthe Vietnam Fatherland Front, our entire people are now struggling with their main and might against the U.S. aggression in our country to defend the DRV, libcrate South Vietnam, and achieve peaceful reunification, highest goal of all the Vietnamese. "Question In case the U.S. Government v.ould solemnly reaffirm its will to respect the basic principles of the Geneva agreements namely, unity and independence of Vietnam and prohibition of any base and any presence of foreign troops on its soil would the Government of the DRV agree to discuss with it . the conditions and guarantees for disengagement which this U.S. declaration would imply? Also, in your opinion, is an end to the U.S. air attacks against the DRV territory a sine qua non condition leading to a settlement of the Vietnam problem? "Answer To this end, the U.S. Government must give tanKiblepro.ofsthatJ-t-4 PONTS accepts the four-point stand of the Government of the DRV which conforms to Cne ess'ehtialoTitilal and military clauses ofne l954 Geneva agree-ent on Vietnam; it must immediately step the air attacks. against. DRV., territory, stop forthwith theaggressive .war against the south'- of our country, and withdraw from there all U.S. treops and weapons. That is peace in honor; there is ho other way out. j  .  t 154     "Question Do you think, Mr. President, that the solution to the Vietnam problem depends directly on the Hanoi and Washington governments withow the holding of an international conference or do you think that it rest; essentially with the NFLSV and the Vietnamese authorities in Saigon to firn a settlement? "Answer The four-point stand of the Government of the DRV gives a clear answer to this question, and there is no question of Saigon authorities,, a creation of the Americans which is cursed by our people, and vrhich noboi; an the world takes seriously. "Friendly greetings." 155      POE NTS GENEVA GUAM DOI NHAN DAN EDITORIAL OF AUGUST 20, 1965 CRITICIZING ATTEMPTS AT MEDIATION IN VIETNAM (A commentary signed "Observer" in the PAVN daily newspaper, Quan Doi Nhan Dan, makes the first open criticism of attempts at outside mediation of the Vietnam conflict and also expresses DRV sensitivity to U.S. bombing raids. The following excerpts were taken from the text of the commentary as broadcast August 20, 1965 over Hanoi VNA in English.) 11 ...Can there be any conciliation between these two diametrically incompatible stands? Conditional or unconditional? "The Vietnamese people have always been stressing that only when the U.S. Government shows, concrete manifestations of p,ts recognition ofthe four-point stand of the DRV Government and the five-point stand of theNFLSycantherebeabasi.5X.Qr.th.ep.eaceful settlement of the war in Vietnam. "The U.S. imperialists have talked so much of their stand of peaceful negotiations, unconditional discussionsAt first hearing, people, may think that the U.S. imperialists put forward no conditions whereas the Vietnamese people raise certain conditions. "The truth is that the Vietnamese people do not put any conditions to the U.S. imperialists. They only demand that the latter strictly implement the provisions of the Geneva agreements which were signed 11 years ago and which the U.S. imperialists undertook to respect. The content of the four point stand of our government conforms to the main political and military provisions of the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam. "Now the Vietnamese people only demand that the U.S. imperialists returnto Ine 1954 Geneva agreements they must stop their aggression, withdraw U.S. troons from South Vietnam, stop air raids on North. "Vietnam and let the Vietnamese ueoule settle their internal affairs ------ ---------------------------- -, --- ----------- -tnemselves. "By so doing, how can it be said that the Vietnamese people put forward new conditions to the U.S. imperialists? "What is the stand of the U.S. imperialists? Since 1954 the U.S. imperialists have sabotaged all political and military provisions of the 1954 Geneva agreements. Whereas these agreements recognize the sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial integrity of 156      Vietnam, the U.S. imperialists have turned South Vietnam into a colony, set up in South Vietnam a separate state, plotting to perpetuate the partition of Vietnam, and are now brazenly carrying out bombing raids against the DRV, thus violating her sovereignty "By raising the stand of peaceful negotiations and unconditional discussions, tho U.S. imperialist;; pursuo a dark scheme of legalizing their acts of serious violations of the 1954 Geneva .agreements over the past 11 years, compelling the Vietnamese people to recognize the presence of U.S. troops and the existence of U.S. military bases in South Vietnam, and imposing on the South Vietnamese people their lackey governments. "Therefore, the so-called unconditional discussions proposal of the U.S. imperialists actually asks for one basic condition recognition of the sabotage of the 1954 Geneva agreements by the U.S. imperialists and recognition of their aggression in Vietnam in the past as well as at present. 'To beat a drum for this deceitful peace, Johnson has been US NOVES ballyhooing that the United States has made considerablc concessions, ThafTashihgtbn'triedagain and again to change it's attitude) that  . the United States does not ooppse.fre.e..,eleeAiQna1brough.Qut.allVietnam and is ready to discuss Hanoi's proposals "This psychological war trick ofthe United States was exposed by theTTTSl press itself. AP commented that what seems to be concessions was considered by Washington as a tactical measure, and that negotiations, night be prolonged so as to give the South Vietnam puppef administrationa breathing spell. "Indeed, without waiting for the disclosure by U.S. papers of this U.S. trick, the Vietnamese people have seen clearly the U.S. aggressive design through their peaceful .negotiations..smokescreen the United States never speaks of withdrawal of U.S.troops and weapons iron-SoutnVfetna; 1, abolTu-bn ofU.S. military bases in Soirtn'Vietnam'f and "a 'definite "end to" their" criminal 'bombing raids 6nl<orh..Vietnam. This means that the U.S.imnerialists. j..n.11. continue to carry out their aggression in Vietnam andviolate.mosts.e.riously the-'basic provisionsofthe Genevaagreementswhileunl peaceful negotiations swindle. Moreover, right at tbomon.ent when they"were speaking of peaceful negotiations, they have brazenly poured benM ofthousands of aggressive troops into South iStnan ana increased BonoingVraiaI-on. lothtietnam to an ever fiercer extent.' Byso doin, unquestionably the U.S. tp..crialists are .deliberately.. throwing every, .possibility on the political settle-ent of the Vietnam. issue into the greatest impasse.  157 .      "The policy of using violence to force the Vietnamese people to recognize the U.S. conditions and to submit themselves to the aggressors has been openly stated by Johnson. Ee said that to continue bombing North Vietnam along with intensifying terrorist raids in South Vietnam remains a key to victory and only this doublo blow can poroUndc North Vietnam. Tho Unitod States still holds that it is necessary to continue raiding and killing until the Vietnamese people lose all hopes in victory. That means the United States must fight until their aggressive goal is achieved. "Obviously, while talking of peaceful negotiations the United States has not in the least given up its aggressive stand. So long as the U.S. aggression continues, the Vietnamese people are resolvcd to resist aggression until complete victory. "The aggressors cannot be put on a par with the victims of aggression. "The U.S. imperialists are thc aggressors, the Vietnamese people arc victims of aggression. In order to solve the war issue in Vietnam, the U.S. aggressors must stop their aggression. That is the only correct measure to restore peace in Vietnam MEDIATION "Our people, who have suffered over 20 years of war, profoundly cherish peace, but peace must always link with national independence. One cannot mediate betwecn the U.S. imneriali sts... stand to carry ,out agglession to the end and the Vietnamese peoples thorough stand to oDPoseaggressron."' If anybody wants" to" stand asTiediatorWithout condemning theaggressors and demanding that thelatter stop'their aggression and without approving and supporting the victims of ag-gressiohiotneff struggle. againstNTh.aggrespfs-Tie-canlbutenl courage.  the .aggressors to.continue. theiraggression. The situation "in Vietnam at present is very tense. The only cause of this tension is the war acts committed by the U.S. aggressors. To relax the . tension, the question now is not to recommend that both sides show less intransigear.ee, but to compel the United States to give up its aggressive scheme. As for them, the Vietnamese people hold that only by determinedly struggling against the U.S. aggressors can the situation be relaxed."     By NWD Date 201 I DRV EMBASSY IN MOSCOW ISSUES "CORRECTION" OF LORD BROCKWAY PRESS. INTERVIEW. (On August 24, 1969 a ERV spokesman in Moscow issued a statement stressing the DEV's f points were the basis for the soundest political solution to the Vietnamese question. This statement was issued after western press agencies including (AP. AF? and UP) had quotio Lord Brockway as saying that the North Vietnamese ambassador in Moscow told him that "Hanoi hnc novor said that all U.S. forces must bo withdrawn before negotiations for a cease-fire or peace begin. They did not insist on this. Lord Brockway also said the DRV ambassador told him Hanoi was prepared to make one concession beyond the Geneva Agreements ie South Vietnam should have temporarilly a generate government, a democratic, national coalition, both politically and militarily neutral.) .According to a VNA correspondent in Moscow, the spokesman of the DRV Embassy in the Soviet Union has issued the following statement  "On 19 August 1965 Nguyen Van Kinh, DRV ambassador to the Soviet Union, received Brockway, chairman of the British Committee for Peace in Vietnam, at the latters own request. "The spokesman of the DRV Embassy in the Soviet Union recalls that at this meeting Ambassador Nguyen Van Kinh explaincd to Brockeay that thefou1v.  point stand of t4s.PJlLCovernrrentasexppur.ded byPremier.Pham Van Dong POINTS qh q April 19$ is the basis for all soundest noli ti cals.olutions.to. the. Vieiinam question. If this basis is recognized., favorable conditions will > be created for the peaceful settlement of the Vietnam problem and it will Eo possible to consider the reconvening of an.international conference of ' the type of the 19pli Geneva 6onf erence on Vietnam. "All the reports released by a number of Western agencies which do not conform to these explanations are without foundation and intended to distort the truthou159      . DRV FOREIGN MINISTRY MEMORANDUM OF SEPTEMBER 23, l?Q5 (The DRV Foreign Ministry Memorandum broadcast in English by Hanoi VNA September 23, 1965 states that the DRV's four points are the "sole correct basis" for a settlement. Folloving are excerpts from the Memorandum.) 1 US MOVES "...Since 7 April 1965 the U.S. authorities have on repeated occa- sions professed readiness to engage in unconditional discussionsnd made proposals for a cease-fire, a 'suspension of the bombing of the north. "But it is in this very period that U.S. President Johnson has. decided to send in 50>000 more U.S. combat troops, raising the U.S. I strength in South Vietnam to nearly 130,000; and a furthcr dispatch ; has also been announced." "Along with the introduction of various types of modern Weapons' into the South Vietnam battlefield, the U.S. authorities have used B-52 strategic bombers and toxic gas to massacre the people and raze villages in South Vietnam. They have unceasingly escalated the air war of destruction against the DRV. U.S. aircraft have bombed even schools, hospitals, dams, and densely populated areas, massacring 5 .civilians and disrupting the peaceful labor of the people in North .Vietnam," "The above facts show that the U.S. Government talks peace to cover up its war designs, and each time it speaks of peace negotiation j it takes a further step in intensifying the war of aggression in South i t Vietnam and in escalating the war in North Vietnam. Faced vrith ever . .stronger protests from the peoples of the world, including the Amer- i 'ican people, it has been compelled to resort to hypocritical talks  . about 'peace negotiations1 witha view to deceiving andppeasing paace-and justice-loving public opinion." Thunconditional discussions proposal of the U.S. authorities .j is but an attempt to compel the Vietnamese people'to accept their own  j terms." ' ; ,lTheseare,U.S. troops will not withdraw, but will cling on to  South Vietnam; the United States always regards South Vietnam as a ) separate nation, that is to say, it wants the partition of Vietnam to j FRONT ba prolonged indefinitely;'"it does 'not recognize theNFLSV, the solo, ' 160 ; i. ' i ; i ;      genuine representative of the people of South Vietnam. As a matter of fact, its scheme is to try to .'.achieve at the conference table what it has been unable to gain on the battlefield. The Vietnamese people will never accept such insolent conditions." The cease-fire trick of the U.S. authorities is designed in US NOVES fact to compel the Vietnamese people in both zones to lay doom their arms while U.S. troops continue to be reinforced, to occupy and commit aggression against Vietnam. This is also an attempt to play for time to consolidate the puppet administration and army, to increase forces for further expansion of the war in Vietnam. But the Vietnamese people will never slacken their fight so long as U.S. troops still occupy Vietnamese territory and so long as their sacred national rightsindependence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity are not achieved and guaranteed. Let the United States stop its aggressive war against Vietnam and withdraw from South Vietnam and peace will be immediately restored" "What is more, they brazenly arrogate to themselves the right of bombing the DRV, an independent and sovereign country. They have seriously violated the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam, grossly trampled underfoot international law, and committed monstrous crimes against the Vietnamese people. Now they are saying that they 'will cease bombing the north if there is some response' from Hanoi." . "The DRV Government solemnly declares that the U.S. authorities must stop their criminal war acts against the DRV. They have no right to impose any condition on the DRV Government. Besides, they must end the war of aggression in South Vietnam" FRONT "The NFLSV, the organize and leader of the South Vietnamese people's fight against the U.S. aggressors, has gained sympathy, support, and recognition from ever broader sections of the worlds peoples. Yet the U.S. Government refuses to recognize it as the sole genuine representative of the people of South Vietnam. It has declared that it does not regard the front as an independent party in negotiations. This further exposes its talks about negotiations as a mere swindle. There cannot be any negotiations on the South Vietnam problem without the NFLSV having its decisive say." "The U.S. authorities are also feverishly trying by every means to secure a U.M. intervention in Vietnam. They have requested help from the United Nations membership at large in getting peace talks started. This is a maneuver to use the United Nations to impose on the Vietnamese people negotiations under U.S. terms." "The DRV Government has on repeated occasions declared that GENEVA internationally speaking the consideration of the U.S. Goverrr.ents war acts against the DRV and. the U.S. war of aggression in South Vietnam falls within the competence of the participants in the 1954 161 .     Geneva conference cn Indochina, and-not of the United Nations. Any UN U.N. resolution in furtherance of the above U.S. scheme will be null and void and will completely discr dit the United Nations.. "They have striven to entice political circles in a number of countries to respond to their proposals and to come out with demands for 'negotiations,' for a cessation of all hostile activities, and for concessions from both sices, out to equate the victim with trie aggressor is to fall into the U.S. imperialists' trap and to negate all elementary principles of freedom and justice-. Therefore the U.S. scheme can by no means deceive peace-and freedom-loving people in the. world." FOUR "The lofty aims of the Vietnamese peoples just struggle have rOiNio been fully embodied in the four-point stand of the DRV Government." "This stand proceeds from the fundamental principles of the 1954 Geneva agreements, which recognize the national rights of the Vietnamese peopleindependence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrityand from the essential military clauses of the said agreements." "The 1954 Geneva agreements are an international legal document which all participants must respect and correctly implement. At the 1954 Geneva conference the U.S. Government, through its delegate, . recognized and pledged respect for them. Yet throughout the past 11 years it has systematically violated them and has thus brought about a serious situation in Vietnam." "The four-point stand of the DRV Government also conforms to the actual situation prevailin in South Vietnam and throughout Vietnam for more than 11 years nowthe United States has engaged in aggression against Vietnam and sabotaged peace in Indochina and southeast Asia, and the Vietnamese people have been fighting against the aggressors in defense of their sacred national rights." "To settle the Vietnam problem it is essential to remove the roots of the serious situation in VietnamU.S. aggression. Any approach which puts the aggressor and the victim on the same footing or which does not proceed from, the real situation in Vietnam will fail to bring about a settlement of the Vietnam problem." -. "This stand also proceeds from the legitimate aspirations of the Vietnamese people in both zones, as embodied in the program of the FRONT Vietnam Fatherland Front and that of the NFLSV; namely, peace, inde- pendence, unity, and democracy." 162 .     ' "The Vietnamese people and the DRV Government earnestly call on the governments and peoples of the world to resolutely struggle and demand that the U.S. Government accept the four-point stand of the DRV Government. The U.S. Government must put an immediate end to the air war against the DRV and completely stop encroaching on the latters sovereignty and security. It must immediately end the was of aggression in South Vietnam and withdraw all U.S. troops and weapons from there" FOUR PThe four-point stand of the DRV Government is enjoying an ever- POINTS warmer sympathy and support from the peace-loving governments and peoples all over the world. It is the sole correct basis for a settlement of the Vietnam problem. Any solutions at variance with it are inappropriate and so are any solutions which seek U.N. interUN vention in the Vietnam situation, because such solutions are fundamentally contraxyto the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam." JThe U.S. Government must solemnly declare its acceptance of this four-point stand before a political settlement of the Vietnam problem- can be considered" I t      VIETNAM COURIER. ARTICLE Os "iiGH SHOULD TiFl MOST CORRECT SOLUTION TO Tit VINTtE' P1O3L-M BH-HmSTOCD11 (On September 2? Hanois VNA in English, broadcast a 'Vietnam Courier" article entitled "How Should the Most Correct Solution to the Vietnam Problem be Understood?" This article was originally published on July 9 in the Vietnamese-language newspaper, Thong Nat (Reunification) as Part III of a four part series called "With any type of vrar the U.S. imperialists will surely fail and we will surely win., The July 9 edition states that "the DRV Government is of the opinion that the above-mentioned stand (four points) is the basis for a correct political solution. The September 27 article states "the DRV Government is of the view that the stand expounded above (four points) is the basis for the soundest political settlement of the Vietnam problem. The article has some, additions, which are given below, which do not appear in the original July 9 article.) "...These dictators succeed one another Department and the CIA. at the beck and call of the State According to many American congressmen and newspapers, the Saigon Government, which is something completely alien to the South Vietnam people, cannot exist even for a week without American dollars and troops, even in 1958 and 1959 when it was said to enjoy a certain stability. Whom does it claim to represent, especially in such a deteriorating situation as today?... "If the defense of the North is the bounden duty of our southern ccn-r patriots, in return the support given to the South is the sacred duty of our -orthern people. Vietnam is one, the Vietnamese peop1e areone. U.S. imperialism is invading our fatherland. Each Vietnamese is dutybound to fight itand save the country. This is a natter of course and an inviolable right of all people suffering from imperialist aggression... "Following the 22 March 1965 NFLSV statement, the. Central Committee of the Vietnam Fatherland Front issued a declaration on 27 March and an appcal on 6 April 1965, excerpts of which are as follows if the U.S. Government is adamant not to implement the Geneva Agreements on Vietnam and does not respect the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of Vietnam and is rash enough to step up its aggressive war in North Vietnam, it will certainly suffer a bitter failure at the hands of over 30 million' Vietnamese people. us vOvv- "Such allegations as recice, discussions out forth by i'. imperialists  3rohnt deceitful words. The U.S. imperialists have openly unleashed war against the DRV. They have torn away the 1954 Geneva Agreements, cutrightly violated the independence and sovereignty of our people, seriously threatened GENEVA the peace of Indochina, Southeast Asia, and the world. The only tray out for the U.S, imperialists is to put an end0 their aggressive war, to withdraw all their troops and weapons as well as those of their satellites, to respect 164 .     the independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity of our country as stipulated in the 1954 Geneva Agreements... "If we do not solve the South Vietnam problem on the basis of these fundamental conditions put forth by the people of the two zones of Vietnam and if we accept the U.S. imperialists' unconditional discussions offer, this would bo tantamount to coming to the conference table to recognise theii' aggression and their permanent presence in South Vietnam- and negotiate under the pressure of their bombs. Ifa country faces imperialist aggres si on and is compelled to sit at the ronf.er.encetdblewbi1eitsenemy persists in his aggression'until 'it acceptshisterms,cah. thatcountry yield to its eneny?Certainly not," 165 .     JOINT ASAHI-MAIN1CHI INTERVIEW WITH PHAM VAN DONG IN HANOI IN OCTOBER 4, 1965 (The Asahi interview published inJapanese in Tokyo on October 5 and The Mainichi interview published in Japanese on October 5,plus written questions answered b y Pham Van Dong for Mainichi published in Tokyo on October 9 are included below. Both articles and the written questions spell out the DRVs position that if the US wants negotiations it must declare clearly that it accepts tho four points. ) Asahi Foreign News Editor Weiryu Hata on Interview With Victnamese Premier Pham Van Dong ' Premier Pham Van Dong of the DRV stated in a very strong tone on 4 October that 'The present Vietnam war can never be settled unless POINTS the United States accepts the four conditions presented by our side. And without that, there .also can be no discussions. 1 During the interview, we asked considerably frank questions, but on each ocCasion, the Premier smiled calmly, and as if to say that he had been waiting for that question. Hc explained carefully why North Vietnam is taking the position that it is now taking. He also repeatedly asked us to understand this point fully and make it known not only to Japanese people but-also to American people. " The Premier is a quiet gentleman with a reddish face, aged 57. The gist of the questions and answers exchanged between us was as follows Question The peaceful settlement of the Vietnam war is tile most pressing question today. We have come to your country, seeking an opening to settlement. What are your views toward negotiations?"Answer Your question touches upon the most important and basic question of the present time. However, as a friend, there is one thing which I wish to ask you first. Do you think that United States is really seeking an armistice and peace? (We replied that the United States can probably end the war itself US if it tried, but that we think that since the United States has committed MOVES itself in various places, it find it difficult to end the war unless it can save face, and in response to this, he replied) No, the United States is definitely not desiring peace. They have no intention at all of ending the war. As a matter 166 .     4 POINTS MEDIATION matter of fact, are they not expanding war inboth the south and the north, while talking about peace ? They still believe in power, and they think that if they further increase their forcesandstrengthen the bombings against the north, they will produce effects. That is very foolish, but it happens to be the truth. That is why we do not trust their peace proposal. In the choice between accepting the Johnson proposal and continuing the war, we chose the course of continuing war without the slightest hesitation. Question The U.S. authorities concerned say, however We wish to settle the problcrn in accordance with the spirit of thc Geneva Agreement, The United States docs not have any territorial ambitions toward Vietnam. It does not even wish to set up military bases there. Vietnam should settle its own internal problcms without receiving inter-fcrence from outside. It your contention is that their words contain no sincerity, why do you not respond to such discussions, or advocate negotiations from your side? Frankly speaking, why can you not take the initiative in order to eliminate thc possibility of thc misunderstanding that it is the United States which is proposing unconditional discussions and it is the North Vietnamese side which is insisting on continuing the war?1 "Answer We proposed four conditions for the settlement of the present war some time ago. They asked for respectof thGeneya .Agreement of 1954 concerning the Vietnam question and soughtthe correct observance of the basic clauses of this agreement. We proposed at the time that if the United States were to issue a statement to the effect that it accepts the four conditions, we will agree to negotiate at any time. However, the United States refuses to accept these conditions. They have no intention of ending the war. We must expose this fact thoroughly. There is no other way for us to expose this fact to the whole world and shame them except by firmly fighting against their aggression and defeating them, completely. We are determined to do so. "Question What is your evaluation of the activities of third parties, such as the call for the suspension of the bombings against the north and peace negotiations, advocated by Ghana and other nonaligned nations ? "Answer The United States is proposing peace talks, in which it does not believe, in order to escapp criticism from these third parties of oood intention and world public opinion which is steadily mounting against it. Thro ugh" these various methods the United States is trying to test our attitude. Their peace calls are a threat to us, similarly as their war expansion policyQuestion 167 .     MEDIATION FRONT "Question If that is so, there is the method of using the same means against them, seizing this opportunity when the United States is talking about peace. "Answer It is not possible to seize thisopportunityand move forward toward peace because the US side has no sincerity at all. It is posTible to seize this opportunity and expose the true nature of the United States. Of course, we welcome those people who aremakingvariousefforts, withgood intentions of peace. Vie are planning to prove to these people by actual deeds how lacking in good intentions the United States is. The way to prove this lies solely in driving the American aggressors to the wall and by pressing them to the last point, or in other words, in continuing the war. Thc Liberation Front in the South and we in the North must fight and win. Until then, the United States will not wake up. The leaders of the United States are fools. Therefore, we must fight more fiercely and win -greater victory. Of course, we will have to be prepared to sustain still greater hardships and sacrifices in the future, but we will never give up. Question We understand fully your side's determination. However, we wish to ask you once again whether there is room for third-party nations of Asia to act within this difficult situation. At the same time, in the sense of moving forward even by one step, what will you do if the United States were to agree to suspend bombings against the North? "Answer (With a big smile) We and the Liberation Front of the -South will make the ultimate provisions for the settlement of the Vietnam Question. Of course, third parties can fulfill certain roles, but the final deciders are ourselves and the people of the Liberation Front., 'The most important thing is for the United States to recognize the strength of the Liberation Front. VIe highly evaluate the Liberation Front's military ?-nd political power. It is a very great force, and it is the only force which truly represents the people of South Vietnam. I ask you to study their policy platform very carefully. Their policies arc very Correct and are exactly suited to the actual situation in the South. It is very-foolish of the United States not to recognize this Liberation Front which is the, only force which has the ability to settle the Vietnam problem. It must be said that that is why the United States is repeating failures. Question 168      Question Can negotiations be realized if the United States recognizes The People's Liberation Front of the South? The United States is saying that it may recognize it as a party to negotiations. FRONT 4 POINTS PAUSE "Answer The best way is for thc United States to negotiate first with the Liberation Front. That is only natural, copsidering that the United Statcs is actually lighting the Liberation Front. The United States is spreading the argument that we of the North are the enemy, but that is only an excusc for expanding the war to the North. It has already been made clcar that the question of the South cannot be settled through bombings against the North. The United States should negotiate with the Liberation Front of the South first of all. However, it will be out of the question if it were to take the attitude of negotiating with the Liberation Front as if it were conveying a favor. The primary and decisive party for the United States to deal with is the Liberation Front " Full Japanese Version of MAINICHI Correspondent Minoru Omori1 s Report From Flanoi on Interview With DRV Premier Pham Van Dong MAINICHI head office foreign news department editor Omori--This reporter had an interview with North Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong for one hour and fifteen minutes from 300 p.m. on 4 October. The premier, at this interview, clarified a very firm determination of resistance against the United States and made the following points, saying that there is no room for negotiations To uphold four conditions to the last, no intention of negotiating with the United States under the present situation. 'The premier made clear the following points 1) He has no intention at all of negotiating with the United States under the present situation; 2) If the United States wants negotiations, it must accept the four conditions and recognize the NFLSV; 3) The United .States temporarilysuspended bombings against the north at one time but that was only a pretext for strengthening escalation; 4) His side is using missiles, and in the future, anti-air firepower, from missiles to rifles will be strengthened; 5) He relies on aid from brother socialists countries; 6) The Liberation Army side did not lose in the fighting .in Chu Lai; 7) Mediation by third powers will have some effects but final settlement must be made bv the parties directly involved in the war; and 8) His side is strengthening close contacts with the South Vietnamese People's Liberation Front. The interview 169      The interview with the premier took'place in the reception room of the president's office; it was a joint interview by this reporter and the ASAHI1 s foreign news dcpartment editor Hata. The premier was wearing an old but clean white shirt and well-creased yellow trousers. He has a broad forehead, and his eyes are mild. However, when he talks about the United States, his eyes gleam with the fierce flame of fighting spirit. He was deeply impressive, voicing throughout the interview his fierce determination that the present situation leaves no room for negotiations. The contents of the interview with Premier Pham Van Dong were as follows "Omori Today, in 1965, when the 20th century is nearing its end, it is not reasonalbe that war is still going on. We can well understand North Vietnam1 s position, but is there no room for negotiations between the north and the south? "Premier Pham Van Dong Your question is a basic question, and I think it also has news value. I will tell you about the possibility of stopping the war. Mr. Omori says that he understands our position, but the most important thing is whether the politicians of the United States have any intention of stopping the var. The United States reinforced its military strength in the south by 100, 000 men in a very short period of time. Why did it do so? That is because the United States has been repcating mistakes and failures in the south to date, and has fallen into a bog. The United States will be crushed in the south if it does not send in huge reinforcements. That is why it has brought in a large number of troops. However, a very important point is that even if it brings in huge military strength, the situation in the south will not change. The United States and allied satellite force's number 150, 000 men, and the puppet troops number 600, 000 men. They certainly have great firepower, but it will not change the victory in the liberation army side. The United States is providing a very good target for the people of the south. You know from your own experience of fighting the Americans that they have no spiritual power. Furthermore, the United States is waging a war which is against justice. It is the U.S. soldierswho are at a loss in a battlefield where the topography and climate are unsuited to them. Therefore, the Liberation Army will win without fail. The Libcration Army will secure greater victory than that in the battle of Ban Tsuon (meaning the fighting in Chu Lai--MAINICHI) in the future. "Omori 170      Omori The U.S. side says that it won in Chu Lai, but what is the true situation? "Premier The United States claimed a false victory for propaganda purposes. It brought in huge forces, and it has to make propaganda to encourage them and also public opinion within thc United States. In fact, the United States suffered a big failure in Chu Lai. The Liberation Army completely destroyed four battalions consisting of 1, 000 men, You will find out about this if you go to Saigon and ask American soldiers who actually took part in the battle of Chu Lai. Next, I wish to touch upon questions of politics. The United States sent its expeditionary forces into South Vietnam, and has decided to carry out direct aggression by itself. This proved to the South Vietnamese pcople that the United States is a robber. All strata of the people, even the puppet military forces, will come to stand up and fight against the U.S. forces. The United States has already lost face. This, too, has brought good results for the Liberation Army side. The people do not yet know the huge size ofthe military forces the United States has brought into South Vietnam, and in South Vietnam, a sacred war of resistance against the U.S. forces is continuing. Meanwhile, the United States is even resorting to atrocious methods-. The people's sense of resistance is being fanned by these atrocious methods. The U.S. forces are like an island isolated in a sea of pcoples hatred, and if they were to take even one step out of the island, thcy will be dcstroyed. What can the U.S. forces, isolated on an island, do? This is proved by the history of the war of resistance against France. Omorit What the United States really wants is to stop the war. The problem lies in the fact that the United States has made a promise to the South Vietnamese Government and the world, and I think the key to settlement lies in how the United States can save face. Premier All questions focus on that point. The United States has no intention of stopping the war; it is rather strengthening the war. It has sent huge forces into the south and is also preparing escalation toward the north. "Omori What do you think of the mediation efforts of the special envoy of Ghanaian President Nkrumah and the 17 neutral nations ? . Premier 171 .     MOVES US MOVES PAUSE "Premier Unless we see the United States' real sincerity and efforts for settlement, we cannot feel like trusting the United States at the moment, the United States is testing us. While talking about peace, itfs threatening us. At the same time, it is laying plots against world public opinion, too. World opinion is fiercely against the United States. "(In reply to Hatas question asking, "The United States must talk about peace to tile world; is it not possible to grasp and utilize this point?) Premier It is not yet possible to grasp, that chance and move forward to peace. We will prove justice to thc world with actual deeds and drive the United States to the wall. Wc intend to fight through fiercely, in both North and South Vietnam , prcpared for still greater difficulties and further sacrifices. Therefore, ve want you to understand our position. For that purpose, I will explain bricfly the important " points of the present war situation in thc north and the south. The U.S. forces carried out operations to build foothold bases, just as in the case of French General (Tussini--phonetic), but failed. Neither U.S. Ambas- sador Lodge nor General Lansdale has bcen able to bring about big political results. Their way is no different from that of Ngo Dinh Diem. The United States definitely cannot win even if it increases its forces in the south. "Omori However, there is order in matters, and as it is not possible to settle everything at once at one stroke, what will you do if the United States were to suspend bombing against the north for a long period of time. "Premier The United States1 escalation against the north has failed so far. Its greatest failure lies in its having been unable to bring-- -- --------- --  .   ... ..the north to the conference table by threatening its pcople. World opinion, on the contrary, is starting to demand the suspension of U.S. bombings against the north. Earlier, the United States propagandized that it had suspended bombings against the north for somedays. Hoxvl ever, we were not able to rcspond, as the suspension of the bombings were aimed at eliciting our consent to demands which we cannot possibly "acceptl The temporary suspension was rather a pretext for further escalation. AVe cannot possibly accept such temporary suspension or such demands. Rather, we are pushing forward preparations to expose further 172 .     further the United States' plots. We will further strengthen our antiair power without fail. And, we will prove the unprofitableness of the United States' escalation. "Omori Is North Vietnam using missiles for the defense of Hanoi? Premier Yes, we used them, exactly as you say. Omori How many times have you used them? Premier I do not remember exactly how many times wa used them, but our air dotcnSo tvoapOim, from rnxusiloo to rifles, are effective, and we will strengthen all of them in the future. And, we will effectively increase damage to U.S. planes and pilots. The pilots are all excellent American fliers, but if escalation is further pushed forward, the casualties among them will rise to several thousand. "Toxvard Hata s three questions, that is, 1) the people of the north all have rifles today, so does the strengthening of anti-air firepower mentioned by the government mean the increasing of missiles?; 2) Do you intend to attack the other sides take-off (hasshin-kichi) bases for planes, from the North?; and 3) Are you using planes for defense battles? The premier said that he could not reply to question 2, but said as follows in answer to questions 1 and 3 Premier We will strengthen all kinds of weapons, and in the future, we shall rely on brother socialist nations. We are also using planes. "Omori Is the north in contact with the Peoples Liberation Front in the south? Premier We are in full contact. Omori In what way are you maintaining contact? Premier That, I cannot say. However, what I wish to say is that the Liberation Front has great authority and prestige in the south. FRONT I hope you will tell the United States this fact. The people now holding political power in the United States are fools. They cannot see this fact. IVe have been saying that the sole representative government in the south is the Liberation Front side. The United States should knov that. Mr. Omori urges negotiations, but as long as the United States does not recognize the People1 s Liberation Front of the south, there cannot be any negotiations. The Liberation Front side holds the key, both politically and militarily. We highly esteem and respect the Peoples Liberation Front. "Omori If the United States were to recognize the Peoples Liberation Front as a party to negotiations, will it be possible to discuss the problems of the south? . 'Premier 173     I -----------------------------------.------------------- "Premier That would be most desirable, but that is the problem . Who is fighting the United States inthesouth?.Itisthe.liberation, army. FRONT nd yet, thc U.S. side is escalating the war against the north. Does "it think that it can negotiate with the north alone and settle the problem? A third partys contribution to settlement is limited. Onaori Before coming here, I stopped in Djakarta and discussed with Indonesian President Sukarno about thc possibility of seeking a way to settlement by holding a summit conference of the leaders of Asian nations near Vietnam and about the possibility of adopting a declaration for settlement of the issue at an Afro-Asian conference. What do you think of these ideas? "Premier The most important point in regard to the Vietnam question is that all matters must be pushed forward in close liaison with our sidc and with the Peoplc1 s Liberation Front in the south. It is possible for third parties to make contributions to a pertain extent, but MED- finaj settlers, or deciders, are ourselves and the Liberation Front IATION --------------.v---------------------------------------------------------------- of the south"Hata then asked The United States says that it respects the Geneva agreement and that it does not have territorial ambitions. It also says that the Vietna-m question should be settled by the Vi etnamese people themselves. Is it not possible for you to take hold of these state- meats and propose negotiations on thc basis of your four conditions from your sidc? There are some people even in Japan who think that it is the North Vietnamese side which is rejecting negotiations. To this, the premier replied as follows Premier In that regard, we 4 have announced that if the United States issues a statement to the effect POINTS that it will recognize the four conditions, we will respondto talks. The 'UniTed-States, however, has no such intention. We are ready to fight as long as necessary. We have faith in the Japanese people s friendship. The United States is attacking Vietnam from bases in Japan; we hope that the good sense of Japan will stand up and see to it that the ground ' is laid for the maintenance of truly friendly relations in the future when our country becomes united. , Mainichi Questionnaire to Pham Van Dong "Minoru Omori, chief foreign news editor of Mainichi, submitted a questionnaire regarding a peaceful solution to the Vietnam dispute to . ' North 174      North Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong, irrespective of the 4 October interview with him. MAINICFII received a cable reply from Pham Van Dong on 8 October. Here follow excerpts from Pham Van Dongs important answers, omitting the same answers made by him in the above interview. "Question What do you think about President Johnson s proposals for unconditional talks" and "peace talks?" . "Answer President Johnson began to talk about peace negotiations US half a year ago. However, whenever he spoke about peace, he ordered MOVES r einfo r cement of the U.S, forccs in South Vietnam and "e sc ala te d'' the  war against -North Vietnam. Johnson has been speaking about peace while carrying out the war. His "unconditional talks" would be nothing but the Vietnamese peopled acceptance of the U.S, -proposed conditions. In a word, President Johnson1 s hypocritical appeal for peace is designed to cover up war activities, to cheat the world, and to dodge the protest of the people of the world, including the Unitcd States. Question What is your opinion of the neutral Afro-Asian nations' wish for a settlement of the Vietnam war? "Answer The Vietnamese people and thc DRV Government heartily appreciate the fact that many Afro-Asian peoples and governments arc worried about the Vietnam issue, that they bitterly denounce the U.S. imperialist aggression in our country, and that they support our patriotic fighting from the bottom of their hearts. We believe that the socialist countries and the people of the world, including Asia and Africa, will strengthen their sympathy with us and their support for us to completelysmash the U.S. imperialist aggression. The only just way to settle the 4 Vietnam issue is to accept, in line with the 1954 Geneva agreement, the POINTS four conditions proposed by the North Vietnamese government and the stand explained in the NFLSV1 s March statement. "Question Concerning the so-called four conditions which you submitted to the DRV T. P arliament last April, should we understand them, as your ultimate conditions? Can we not consider them preconditions for talks ? '  Answer 175     "Answer North Vietnam s four conditions are in complete 4 accord with every one of the essential, political, and militarypsovisions '01..iS t<ne Geneva accords of 1954, The four conditions alone can be t' basis to bring a correct solution to the Vietnam issue. The U.S. C-overn-ment must declare clearly that it accepts the four conditions. A political solution can be considered after that. Question What will be your countrys response if the United States suspends its northern bombing for a due period? Also, do you think thc U.S. forces will bomb Hanoi in thc near future? "Answer The U.S. imperialists are shamelessly 'escalating the war and bombing North Vietnam. As the result, however, they are meeting an intensified offensive by thc South Vietnamese people, as well as huge losses inflicted by the North Vietnamese people. Not being the least daunted, and intensifying their enmity against the U.S. aggressors, all. the Vietnamese people are strengthening their determination to fight for national salvation. Availing myself of this occasion, I ask MAINICHI to convey to the Japanese pcople our deep gratitude for extending warm help to our patriotic anti-U.S. war    MAI VAN BO STATEMENT, 5 JANUARY 196? THE NEW YORK TIMES, FRIDAY, JANUARY 6, 1967 NiA YORK TIMES v JANUARY 1967 P-l ( A EBTOBOMGS e. COW SPUR TALKS By RICHAKD E. MOONEY ' Spcdd hTtif Snr York Tlmti PARIS, Jan. 5North Viet- c nam's chief dlplmnatlc repro-sentatlve In Western Europe said tOday that If thc UnttCd ''S,. States stepped bombing hts country, definitively and un-conditionally," the Hanoi Gov- V emment would "examine and U study" American proposals for r negotiations to end the war. He denounced several recent peace initiatives, including thc efforts cf the Unltrd Nations' Secretary General, U Thant, and o inted that his GOvernment wc,d be more responsive if ths bombing stepped. His remarks were interpreted here as possibly, but not certainly, a favor-able signa to Wasllingtcn. However, he did not meet Washington's requirement that Hanoi give aSsuranccs of scat-Ing down Rs own effort if thc bombing stopped. U. S. Aggrosston Charged Rather, ho said that the United States "could not hepe for reciprocal action ot any sort," noting that "Ole Ameri. can aggression was still undeclared war and that Hano! had instated on an unconditlonat cessation of thc bombing frem the very start. The remarks came In & iunr.hcon talk to French and foreign correspondents here by Mal Van Bo, wfio Is, tn a sense, Hanoi's ambasaador here al-though officially he hsads a diplOmaUc office that Is called a. "general delegation." Mr. Bo hotds the perSonal rank of mln-lister plentpctentlary. 1 Everything he said was La J response tn questionselght cl J them. Much o' what he aaId was Insistent repetltlon ot his coun-; trys charges against washtng- ton and of His cOuntrymens de-; termlnation and ability to win j the war. His hint of flexibility  on peace talks, if it was that, t was well padded with comb.tuva remarks to the contrary. French Reds Hear Talks By coincidence or desfgn there were also speeches here today by a Ncrul Vietnamese CommunISt leader and a leader of the National Liberation front, the political nun ot the Vlct-ceng. Both were made at the French Communist Party con-gre  in suburban I.cvalfois. Neither hinted at fIexibillty. ' Nguyen van Tr.tn, Secretary of the North Vi tninu' > work-ers party and Minister for Hcavyy Industry in the Hanoi! Govenuucnt, said that Vniied states peace initiatives were a i farce, 1 Dang Quuik Minh, represent- ling thc National Liberation Front, said that "thc poSsIbilityl of winning mililoily lias bc-comc a living reality' for 11s." At the press luncheon, Mr. Bo maintained a Sober and unemotional expression throughout. He Was derisive toward recent peace appeals ot washingtons united States detc- gate, Arthur J. Goldberg, and , the British Foreign Secretary, George Brown. Ue called Mr. Goldbergs effort "the same old song." Mr. Brown's proposal for immedi-. ate talks, he Said, is thc English version of the American proposal of unconditIonal negotiation. designed to placate British public opinicn, which demands that its Government break away from thc American policy." In the same response he said Of Mr. Thant'S efforts that "thO Government of thc Democratic Republic of North Vietnam rejects all Intervention by the' Vilitcd Nations in thc Vietnam affair for the good reason that this intervention would be cen-trary to thc Geneva agree-; merits" of 1954, which endcd the FreiiCh IndOChina war. He made no distinCtion between the United Nations and Mr. Thant. "Every preposat aimed nt pro- moting a settlement o the Vietnamese problem must COnform to the reality of the war," be said. "In other wordS, the dis-i tinctlen must be made be-twecn the American aggresscr and thc vietnamese victim, and the responsibility of the Amcri-can aggressor must be well defined. Gn a question about Premier Pham van Deng's interview in Hanoi yesterday with Harrison E. Salisbury, an assistant man-aging editor of Thc New York Times, and particularly on the status of Hanoi's four-point pcaeo program, Mr, Bo refused to comment on the publIshcd article, but S lid the following The United States must first recognize the National IJbera-tion Front of South Vietnam, 'which is the only authentic representative of thc South Vietnamese people, to negetiatc with them and settle all thc questions of south Vietnam. Hanot, for its part, Insists that the United States recog-nizc the four-point program as a basis for a settlement of the vietnamese problem, and to demonstrate its goodwill by stepping the bombing Of North Vietnam definitively and wlth-eut conditions. In this, Mr. Bo SOemEd to repeat the Premier's declaration that the four points are a basis Ifor settlement rather than a conditiOn for talks. Hanoi's four points are Recognition of the IndependcnCC, sovereignty', unity and territorial Integrity of Vietnam and the withdrawal of tin!ted Slates forccs from the area pending reunification of Vietnam; rc-speCt for the milItary provislans Of thc 1954 Geneva agreemrnt barring foreign forces; settlement of Scuth victnam's lnter-nal affairs by thc Scuth Viet-jnamese In accordance with thc I program of the National Llbcr-atlOn Front end peaceful rcunl-Hcatlon of vietnam by the peoples ot North and south without foreign interference. Questioned abcut the posalbil-ity of allowing other Western Journalists to vKlt North Vict-imm now, Mr. Bo Said that he could not understand their enthusiasm for such a riSky assignment, and expressed regret that considerations of safety would net permit his Government to admit as many as It would like te. Asked whether there were North Vietnamese troeps in Smith Vietnam, Mr. Bo did not respond directly. He Said that "the armed forces of the Na-tional Liberation FrOnt the VietCOng and the people of Scuth vietnam are sufficient to hold in check the American expeditionary force," and that the rebels could also "recall to South Vietnam thc men who have been regrouped in thc north." !n a preface to his answer to one question, Mr. Bo said, "Fer thousands cf years the Vietnamese pcople have bCCn one natiOii, one people, speak-ing the same language, "While it has sometimes bCen divided, it has bccn able to re-establish lts national unity cach time it has recovered its in-dependence. W the bombingS, Itr. Bo Said that they had fatted to undcr-niinc morale, dlsOrganlzc the eccnomy or shake the Gdvem-ment. In thc light Of their ineffectiveness, and the unanimous condcmnatlon of which they arc the object," ho said, "if the united States comes to halting thc bombardment definitively and without conditions, this fact will be examined and studied by the Hanoi Government. 'If, after the definitive and unconditional cCSsation of thc bombardments, the AmerIcan Government proposes to enter into contact with the f Hanoi J Government, ! believe that thm proposal will bs examined and studied, too. Mr. Bo waS not asked about and did not volunteer to comment on the Chinese Soviet split as it relates to the wara fa-vorite therne al the French par-tys current congress. Arvid Y. Pclshc, a membOr of the Politburo Of the Soviet party, tcld the congress today that China's refusal to act jointly with ether cbffiiminlst ceun-trics in supporting vietnam "carries water to the mill of thc American Imperialists and en-couragcsithcm to enbirgO their aggrcsr.Ion." Mr. Pchbe reported that more than CO Communist parties had declared that they favor a world Communist conference. But Luigi Longo, thc Italian party chief, and the most Important foreIgn Communist at ths Cor gress, said that he ptefered "ex changc.s of oplnton" and mul Utatbra! meetings" rather ths. a world assembly     . z ' < . 9JJ 1 q I . NORTH VIE T JI A 1-1 30 Ja n tta r 7 i qf>7 ' ' owuTCN i-HKLSlTiq ISTERVlEiT Wil WRCHETT Hanoi VKA. International Service in English 0150-ONT 28 January I967--B (Text) Hanoi. 28 JanuaryNsuyen buy Trinh, DRV foreign minister, has granted an interview to Australian journalist; Ulirred Burchccc. Questions and answers follow Question Hr. Minister, what in your view are tire uoSt Significant recent develop-Dents .in che Viernau war, and wnat are the prospects for tne imedlatc future? Answer Tnc U.S. miperialistS arc waging tnc nost barbaroua war of asecession against our country; threatening nore and more Seriously peace in southeast Asia and thc waricl. Bav they have Sustained heavy defeats m Soul and in Worth Vietnam.. The people of South Vietr.sn. figlnirtg mth great heroism, have foiled all their military plans in spite of rhe coELuitmcms of ever 1 taiilion U.S., puppet, and satellite treops. ihe people of North Vietnau have nor been and will never be cowed by the barbarous bobbins raids of the U.S. mpcrialists and have dealt then well-deserved counter blows, >- . All Vietnamese people are resolutely fighting asainsr the U.S, aggreSSOvs to defend .their sacred national rights and fulfill their duty co the peOplea of thc friendly countries now struggling for their independence and frcsdom. The four-point stand of the DRV Government. is a stand of independence and peace, md it is tile expression. 01' the fundamental principles and the sain pro vision a of the -95 Geneva ag me cm cats on Vietnam. It is the basis for the cost correct political solution to thc Vietnam problen. a baais uirtch fully neeta the deep aspirations of the Vietnamese people, and fuliy conforms to rhe spirit- of the five-point Statement of thc NFLSV, the only genuine raprcscntative of thc people of South Vietnam , The peoples of the world, including very large sections of the population of thc United SrateS itself. more a.id more Strongly eupporc oar Jitsu stand and deaand ever more firefly that the U.S. iraoeriaiists stop their war of Egression in Vietnam and Icp the Vietnamese people settle their own affairs themselves.  Thc U.S. imperial is 6s tall; of peace negotiations, but they still show reat obduracy. President Johnson recently stated with impudcncc that he wil, go on intensifying; and expanding the nr of acession in an attcr.pt co cling m the south and to prolong the partition of victnan. But however perfidious the Luneuvcr;'of the U.S. imperialists I nay be, the VietnaceSs people, united as one man and fearins neither hardshipS nor sacrifices, are deternined to carry on their resistance war to rhe end to safeguard the independence .nd freedom of the fatherland, and contribute to the riaintenance of peace in southeast Asia and the world. The VietcaneSe people trill win. The U.S. imperialist aggreSsors will be defeated. I Question In thc face of docuncntats evidence and eyeuitncSS reports from foreign witnesses, including American Journalists, Washington continues to clain that U.S. aircraft have been stribins only at military targetS and not at civilian targetS in forth Vietnam that arc your vj.c;vj on this subject? . r Ar.SWcr The ORV is an independent ana sovereign country and the U.S. imperialists have absolutely nt rig1" to violate this independence and sovereienty. '178 .  .     .50 January 2967 . ; NORTH VlElumI ' 1 . ' . I > U.S. bombing 0J anc pomt of its territory, whether a cilitsry or a civiiian target, 1s a blatant act of aggression and an unpardonable c'ir.c. It is an undeniable fact thUt civilian carpets in Month Vietna have teen attacked. The peopies of the worid, including iarce sections of tiro An?rican pecpIe, are Strongly protesting aeainst the U.S. i'aperia1iStS savacc acts cf aggrosSion. Thc U.S. iupcrialists tuxsfc stop definitively and unconditionally the bonbins laidS and all other aetS of car against tlte DRV. Question The United States has spoken of the need for dialog or contact between itSelf and tne DRV. Wouid you comment on this statement?  . I Answer Tria United States has made such statcuonts, but in itq deeds it has Shown the ut;..OSt obduracy and perfidy and continues the eScaiaticn, Stepping up and expanding the aggressive war. if it really cants taikS, it must first I halt unconditionaUy thc bctibme raidS and all other acts of w.r against the  DRV. It if only after the unconditional ccsaation of U.S. bombing and ail other acts of war against the DRV tnat there could be talks between the DRV and the j United States. ti-o The four-point stand and the correct attxvude of the D3.V Gwernstent enjoy, we are sure, eve.- stronger approval and support few all peace 3 ovine and Justice-Loving peoples and coternnentS in the uorld. If the United Stavca refuses to . iisten to reason, it will further unmasl. .ltSeif an obdurate aesressor. The Vietnam&Sc people are deternmed to fight mtii total victory to defend th? north, Utarate the south, achieve the peaceful reunification of thc fa th? ri and.  ar contribut e to the m-lintervlnee of coacc- m this area and in the wcrid.  .Si .1  ' i      MAI VAN BO STATEMENT, 22 FEBRUARY 1967 THE NEE YORK TIMES, THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 1967 NEW YORK TIMES 23 February 1967 Fl Hdnoi Offers Aneto T0 Join U.S. in Talks If Bombing Is Ended By HENRY TANNER . Special to The New York Times  PARIS. Feb. 22A spokesman for Hanot reaffirmed today its otter to enter into talks with the United states if American bombing attacks againSt North vietnam were unconditionally and permanently halted. Mai van Bo. the North vietnamese representative in Paris, indicated that his Government's position on this point had not changed in Spite of the resumption of American bombing Feb. 14 following a six-day suspension. Mr. Bo mad? his statement In a conversation with reporters from The New York Times at the headquarters of the North Vietnamese mission near Montparnasse on thc Left Bank of Paris. Before his statement, thcre had bccn widespread speculation for several days that the 1 North victnamose position ' had hardened after the resumption of the bombings . and the failure of the mcdia-lion attemptcd in London by Prime Minister wilson and thc Soviet Premier, Aleksei N. Kosygin. The principal rcaSon for this sprCulatinn was a mcsSagc from President Ho Chi Minh to Pope Paul V! on Feb. 13 rc-Stnting Hanoi'S four-poInt demandS, Including withdrawal of American forccs from Vietnam. AS originally put forward in April 1965 by North Victnam's Premier, Pham van Dong, these demands were deScribrcl as thc basis for a peaceful Settlement. They called for united states withdrawal from south Viet- .. nam, a prohibition against the stationing of any fcrcign troop in vietnam, a settlement of South victnam's internal affairs in accordance with the political program of the National Liberation Front, and a rcunifiCation of North and South vIctnam without foreign interfcrcncc. Ho Chi Minh Citra BmuhInjr President Ho Chl Minh, tn his mcsSage to the Pope, phrased the demands as follows The U.S. imperialists must put an end to their aggression in vietnam. end unconditionally and dcfinltlvdy tha bombing and all other arts of war against the Democratic Rcpublic of vietnam, withdraw from South vietnam all AmOrlcan and sateJ-iite troops, recognize the South vietnam National Liberation Front and let the vtetnameSc people thnmsclves -.settle thetr own affairs," Mr. Bn said today that Uv Prc=idcntS message hart referred to the terms of a sctlle-ment and not tn the process of getting peace talks Started. Therefore, lie added, it did not , constitute a change in thc vietnamese position. j Mr. Bo rcprated ovcr and . over that the halt of American bombing had to be "permanent and unconditional." He Said the North victnamcSc would not talk "under bombs" or the threat of bombs. He said that any cessation of bombing that was not clearly labeled "permanent anil unconditional" would leave the threat of bombing" intact and thus would constitute an unacceptable in-terfcrcnee with thc negotiation. ASked how a distinction could be made between a temporary and a permanent halt to bombing. he answcred that the united Statcs would have to declare at the outset that the halt was "permanent arid uncondittonal." Trinh Interview Recalled Mr. Ko said that Nguyen Duy Trinh, the Nnrth vietnamese Forcign Minister, made an important gesture of goodwill toward the UnitCd states in late January whon hfi told wilfred Burchett, an Australian correspondent, that talks between Washington and Hanot would bO possible If the bomblng Stopped. The North vietn.ime.Se rep-rcsentatlve said that that had eonStitutcd a basic change in Hanoi's position. Earlier, he Said, his governments Stand was that if the United States stopped bombing unconditionally, this new fact would be studied end that, If washington then propoSed to negotiate, this proposal also WOuld be studied. 180      Mr. Bo chargcd that thc United states Government had responded in "bad fafth" to the North vietnamese gesture of goodwill." He aSertcd that neither Prcsi-dcnt Johnson nor Secretary of State Dean Rusk had ever quoted Mr. Trinhs statement fully or accurately. This, he addcd, was proof of bad taith Since Hanoi's real poSition was fully known and understood in washington. He repeated several times that the Hanoi Government bad made its "gesture" and that it was up to thc Uultcd Statcs now to make the next move. He said a concession" of the kind that was made by Mr. Trinh in the Burchett lntcrvlcw remained valid" only it if was fOllowed up by thc othcr side. Mr. Bos remarks indicated that thc North vietnamese would not be moved by Prcsi-dent Johnson's demand for a rc-ciprocal move on their part to accompany any United states cessation of bombing. Mr. Eo. a slightly built man in his late forties or early fif-tics, was wearing a business suit when he received his visitors in a silting room that waS simply but comfortably fur-nished. Drcp grccn upholstered chairs and a Sofa v.'Cro grouped around a low table. Dcep-rcd azalea plants were standing on thc table and on a hieh side-board. Thc only decoration on the wall was a portrait of Ho Chi Minh. Mr. Eo carries thc rank of a minister plcnipotenlIary and is Hand's chief representative 'in Europe. Uis mission oci-upioS a niod-est Ihree-Story brick bouse al 2 Rue Ie Vcrrier. over the en-tranic is the rniblcm of NoiLIi vietnam, a gnld star and a gold cogwheel on a rcd barknround. Mr. Bo, underlining his rc-marks in turn with easy smiles and cnintion-chnkcd scowls, an-swercd questions freely amt cx-tcmporanenusly in perfect FiciuIi. He made it clear that this was a conversation" and not an interview." tic Said that lor an interview lie would have insisted on written qucstions and would have givcn written answers. He asked that his remarks be reported fairly and correctly. Mr. Bo Indicated, but did not specifically Say, that the four point program of Hanoi was subject to negotiation oner United States-North vietnamese talks had started. W hen asked whether the four points constituted absolute terms for a Settlement or whether a compromise might be possible, he answered that he could not say what would hap-pen in any talks since no talks were now taking place. Mr. B. called the tcur points the mOst correct" solution. Asked whether this could bc translated into English as "U1O best" solution, he said "no." It is "the mest correct solution. he declared, because It would assure the North Yict-namesc people thc full exercise of their national rights, real in-depcndcnce and lasting peace. 181  Section 3.,    Strung Backing for Front Mr. Bo was asked about the ' third of the four points, which calls for the settlement of the affairs of South vietnam ac-cording to the program of the National Liberation Front. He said that the North Vlet-namc.se Guvernmcnt regarded the National Liberation Front as the only "authentic repre-sentative" of the South Viet-namesc people. He said thc program of the front was to give Scuth Viet-nam independcner, democracy, peace and neulratfty. Jie addvd that Hanoi Supported this program and regarded all the prnb-lems of South vietnam as thc sole concern Of the front. ThCrrfore, ho stated, there could be peace only If the united States settled South vietnamese prebIems with thc front. Mr. Bn dcnounccd In Strong emotional terms the continua-tion of United states bombing. He charged that the united States govcrnmcnt was COmmit-ting "crimes" in vietnam "crimes which are worse than these of Hitler." He Salt! "millions of vietnamese suffered Mr. Bo-asserted that the origin of the war lay in thc Amerl-can decision to support the "phantom government'' of thc late President of South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Dicm, and to bring In an cxpcditIonary force of more than <;00.000 men to wage what he described as a colonial war. He said the American pccplc had to be told about the "war crimes committed by their Government, Mr. Bos voice choked when he Said . "one must demand that thc American Government stop We war agaInst an entire pccple whose only crime Is to refuse to accept American law. "That'S what the war is about vietnamese independenCC. Al! the rest is propaganda, Ues turned out by a propaganda ma-chine." Mr. Bo made a distinction be-tween thc American people and leaders of the American Gov-ernment. He said the people "like all pCoplCS," wauled peace and that the North Victnamesc knew this. He said the spirit nt American officials was illustrated recently by a statCmcnt by Gen. Curtis LcMay former Air Force chief Of staff. Mr. Bo charged that the gcn-era! had advocated raturaiinr bombing of the North and had declared that, even it two bricks remained untouched it was too mueb. .The North Vietnamese rcp-resentative said this was the language of "the cannibals of flic 20th century." Hp adrift! that he cculd nnt belinve that the general, thouRli retired, did not reflect the state of mind of official Washington, Criticism by LeMay Recalled General LcMay has frequently called for stepped-up bombing of North Vietnam. In an article for U.S. News and World Report laSt Gctober, he dCnounccd the United States strategy In Vietnam aS thc "ultimate in military bllndncas" and said "The only way to win ft war is to escalate it one way or ancthcr above what the enemy can take." Last month he Said tn an tn-terview with The Associated Press "It is not our a!rn to Invade North vietnam or destroy North Vletnam. What we want to do Is stop them from carrying out their aggression." 182 .     NORTH VIETNAM 1 September 1967 HANOI MEETINGS HELD TO MARK NATIONAL DAY Pham Van Dong Speech Hanoi VNA International Service in English 1506 GMT 31 Aug 67 B Text Hanoi--The 22d anniversary of the founding of the DRV has just been celebrated at a grand meeting in Hanoi. President Ho Chi Minh was present on the Presidium. Among those on the Presidium were Vice President Ton Duc Thang; Le Duan, first secretary of the VWP Central Committee; Truong Chinh, member of the Political Bureau of the VWP Central Committee and chairman of the National Assembly Standing Committee; Premier Pham Van Dong, member of the political bureau; and Vice Premier General Vo Nguyen Giap, member of the Political Bureau and commander in chief of the Vietnam Peoples Army. Nguyen Van Tien, head of the permanent NFLSV representation in the DRV was present. Members of the diplomatic corps in Hanoi and foreign guests now visiting Vietnam also attended the celebration.  After the opening speech by Chairman Truong Chinh, Premier Pham Van Dong delivered an important speech in which he reviewed the situation in Vietnam expounded the just stand of the Vietnamese people, and reiterated their determination to march forward still more vigorously in order to win final victory over the U.S. aggressors. Premier Pham Van Dong recalled the brilliant victories won by the armed forces and people in both the north and the south in their fight against U.S. aggression and for national salvation, as well as in economy, culture, and other fields. He stressed that all this had driven the U.S. imperialist aggressors into a serious impasse and isolation in the United States and in the world. He particularly pointed to the growing indignation among the American people of all strata over the U.S. ruling circle's policy in Vietnam and expressed the Vietnamese people's firm support for the just struggle of black people in the United States for freedom and equality. Premier Pham Van Dong vehemently denounced the U.S. imperialists, who, although suffering heavy defeats, are still obdurately intensifying their war of aggression in South Vietnam, escalating their war of destruction against North Vietnam, and, at the same time, staging an election farce in South Vietnam in the hope of dolling up their puppets and making fallacious allegations about peace negotiations in an attempt to mislead world public opinion. Recalling the stand of the Vietnamese people regarding a political settlement of the Vietnam problem and the question of negotiations, Premier Pham Van Dong said On these questions, the stand, viewpoint and attitude of the Vietnamese people, the DRV government, and the NFLSV are very clear and correct. On our government's four-point stand This stand is the basis for a correct political solution to the Vietnam people. 183 .     1 September 1967 NORTH VIETNAM In the very days when the United States expanded the war from the south to the north, brazenly carrying ottt air attacks against the DRV, our government proclaimed its four-point stand and the NFLSV issued its five-point statement. That is the standpoint of our peoples inalienable national rights, and an expression of the main military and political provisions of the Geneva agreements. That is our people's fighting stand against the U.S. war of aggression. Along with our military and political victories and, at the same tempo, the strength and justness of this stand have become ever clearer, and have won ever more resolute and vigorous approval and support from the world's peoples, world opinion, and progressive American opinion. On its side, the U.S. Government has so far completely failed to propose any solution to the Vietnam problem. All it has been doing is quibbling and resorting to hypocritical talk, putting forward now 14, now 7 points, with the sole purpose of camouflaging its aggressive design to cling to South Vietnam at all costs and to prolong the partition of our country. On the 28 January 1967 statement of our Ministry of Foreign Affairs We know quite well that the United States does not want to negotiate a settlement of the Vietnam problem, because imperialism is aggressive and warlike by nature. All it wants is war and it is stepping up its aggressive war. To make it possible for everybody and for world opinion to see clearer through the U.S. peace negotiation hoax, and, at the same time, to show our good will, our foreign minister issued his statement of 8 January 1967. The U.S. Government has brazenly unleashed a criminal war against the DRV, an independent and sovereign state, a socialist state. It must therefore definitively and unconditionally stop its bombing and all other acts of war against the DRV, and respect its independence, sovereignty, and territory. That is a legitimate demand of the Vietnamese people, and also an elementary requirement of international law. If the American side really wants to talk it must first of all stop unconditionally the bombing and all other acts of war against the DRV. The United States has no right to demand any reciprocity whatsoever. Yet it is asking for mutual deescalation, and to back this piratical, claim, each time it clamors about peace negotiations, it steps up its aggressive war in the south and its escalation against the north. By so doing, the U.S. ruling circles hope, through bombing, and under their conditions, to force us to the conference table. With regard to the world's peoples, including the American people, they hope to confuse white and black, and blur the line between the aggressor and the victim of aggression. Our people deeply love peace, but this must be real peace closely linked to independence and freedom, not the kind of American peace under the iron heels of the aggressors. So long as the United States pursues its aggression, we will continue to fight. As the NFLSV has said in its statement, our southern compatriots will resolutely fight on until not a single American aggressor is left on their beloved soil. Our people will never submit to force and will never talk under the threat of bombs. 184 .      1 September 1967 NORTH VIETNAM Our people are making every effort to step up the military and political fight on the battlefield, and, at the same time, the struggle on the international front. They have unceasingly developed their initiative and offensive position and exposed the true features of the perfidious U.S. aggressors. The U.S. government has provoked the war of aggression in Vietnam. It must cease its aggression; that is the only way to peace in Vietnam. The U.S. Government must definitively and conditionally stop the bombing and all other acts of war against the DRV, withdraw all U.S. and satellite troops from South Vietnam, recognize the NFLSV, and let the Vietnamese people settle their own affairs. There is no other way! Premier Pham Van Dong pointed out Our people's great resistance war against the U.S. aggression and for national salvation is a concentrated expression standing on the frontline of the revolutionary struggle of the working people and the oppressed nations in the world against the U.S. imperialists and for peace, national independence democracy, and social progress. Our victories are also victories of the revolutionary forces in the world. Other peoples fully understand this fact, which is why the support movement for our people is gaining in strength, scope and depth. As a matter of fact, a world people's front in support of Vietnam against the U.S. imperialist aggressors has gradually taken shape. The more our patriotic war drives the United States into the impasse and records great victories, the mightier, the deeper, and the broader the world people's movement in support of us grows, taking on diverse forms. On the 22d celebration of National day, our people extend cordial greetings and heartfelt thanks to the fraternal socialist countries which are granting to them wholehearted support and assistance in all fieldsmoral and material, political, military, and economic, we warmly hail the fraternal Soviet people who are recording great achievements in building the material and technical basis of communism. This year, we warmly celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Great October Revolution which ushered in a new era in the history of mankind, strongly inspired the working class and the oppressed nations, and showed them the way to make revolution, to wipe out, step by step, imperialism and the other reactionary forces, and to win victory for socialism on a world-wide scale, we are unswervingly following the path of the October Revolution, the path of the Great Lenin, as we have been doing since the founding of our party, we are doing our utmost to bring into play the revolutionary ardor of the masses and to overcome all difficulties, determined to win victories in our revolutionary cause and, in the immediate future, to win victory in the struggle against U.S. aggression and for national salvation and, at the same time, make our worthy contribution to the revolutionary cause of the worlds peoples. we warmly hail the fraternal Chinese people who are successfully building socialism. In our present struggle against U.S. aggression and for national salvation, the great Chinese Peoples Republic is our great rear and the Chinese people are brothers, as close to us as the lips and the teeth. The resist the United States and aid Vietnam movement of the several hundred million-strong Chinese people, a broad, deep, powerful and diversified movement, is a brilliant manifestation of the militant solidarity between the two peoples. 185 .     1 September 196? NORTH VIETNAM Chinas successful test of its hydrogen bomb and nuclear warhead missiles is a positive contribution to strengthening the socialist countries, vigorously stimulates the peoples who are struggling for national independence, and is a great encouragement to our people's struggle against U.S. aggression and for national salvation. True to Marxism-Leninism, our party and people have always been strengthening solidarity with the fraternal socialist countries and the international communist and workers movement on the basis of Marxism-Leninism and proletarian internationalism. On the 22d celebration of National Day, our people extend cordial greetings and sincere thanks to the fraternal Khmer and Laotian peoples who have always been standing on our side in a spirit of mutual approval and support in the struggle against the common enemy, U.S. imperialism, to defend national rights, we deeply rejoice at the happy development of the militant solidarity between our people and the Khmer people as shown by the establishment of diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level between the two countries and by our countrys statement to recognize and respect the present frontiers of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Our people resolutely and unreservedly support the people of Arab countries who continue to carry aloft the banner of struggle against the U.S. imperialists and the Israeli reactionary forces, in defense of their national independence and territorial integrity. On the 22d celebration of National Day, our people extend cordial greetings and sincere thanks to the international working class, the Asian, African and Latin American peoples, and the peace-loving peoples throughout the world, including the American people, who are actively supporting our resistance against U.S. aggression and for national salvhtion. we are very glad to note that the movement of support for our people is being more and more closely combined with the struggle of the working people and oppressed nations in the world for independence, freedom and their vital interests and against the U.S. imperialists' policy of intervention and aggression in various countries. We highly appreciate the success of the first session of the Bertrand Russell International Tribunal to judge the U.S. imperialist aggressors and expose their odious crimes in the south and in the north of our country crimes of aggression, crimes of war, and crimes against mankind. The Bertrand Russell International Tribunal clearly shows that the broad sections of world opinion and the conscience of progressive mankind are on our side. Pham Van Dong said More than ever our compatriots and fighters all over the country nurture deep hatred for the landgrabbers, resolutely turn their hatred into strength and determination to fight and to win, give play to their initiative and offensive position on all fronts--military, political, and international--and strike even harder and more accurately at the U.S. aggressors. On the occasion of the current National Day, all our people further arm themselves with the rock-like will of President Ho as expressed in his 17 July 1966 appeal We are determined to fight until total victory, to perseveringly fight a protracted war, fearing no difficulties, hardships and sacrifices. Nothing is more precious than independence and freedom! Once victory is won, our people will rebuild our country and provide it with bigger and more beautiful constructionsi 186      1 September 1967 NORTH VIETNAM This splendid victory day is awaiting us. Compatriots and fighters, march forward with the mettle of victors, with the determination to defend the north, liberate the south, proceed toward the peaceful reunification of the fatherland, build a peaceful, unified, independent, democratic, prosperous and powerful Vietnam, thus contibuting to the defense of peace in southeast Asia and in the -world. The U.S. imperialist aggressors -will surely be defeated! Our people will be victorious! I A1 ,i 187      3. NFLSV Position Statements .     3. NFLSV POSITION STATEMENTS (UNCLASSIFIED) INDEX SUBJECT PAGE NFLSV Program Enunciating Major Aims, Made Public in February, 1961189 Statement of Central Committee of NFLSV, March 22, 1965, Proclaiming the NFLSV's Five Points Concerning the war in South Vietnam and its Settlement193 Statements of NFLSV Central Committee Spokesman on May 12, 1965, Reiterating the Central Committees Statement on Mar 22, 1965. 199 NFLSV Central Committee Statement of June 12, 1965 Assailing U.S. Aggression...203 NFLSV Restates Peace Conditions Against Military Escalation. 206 NFLSV Spokesman in Algiers, December 20, 1965207 Liberation Radio on Bombing Suspension, January 11, 1966  208 NFLSV will Not Recognize U.N. Decisions, February 3, 1966209 NFLSV Presidium Hails President Ho's Appeal., July 21, 1966 . 211 NFLSV Attacks Peace "Farce" of ASA Countries, August 22, 1966213 Interview with the VC on Huntley-Brinkley Show, Aug. 27, 1966215 Burchett Interviews NFLSV Presidium Head, September 14, 1966 218 Political Program of the SVN NLFfull text adopted by congress of the Front convened mid-August 1967, September 1, 1967 222 188 .     NFLSV PROGRAM ENUNCIATING MAJOR AIMS, MADE PUBLIC IN FEBRUARY, 1961 (The ten-point program of the NFLSV was radioteletyped . by VNA in English to Europe and Asia on February 11, 1961. VNA stated ThaxNthe program of the "newly founded" NFLSV had "recently" been released by LNA (Liberation News Agency), the official organ of the NFLSV. Listing of the ten points is prefaced by mention of the struggle of the South Vietnamese people against Japanese and French domination, and the crimes perpetrated by the cruel and dictatorial United States-Diem rule.) "...The NFLSV undertakes to unite people of all walks of life, all social classes, nationalities, political parties, organizations, . religious communities, and patriotic personages in South Vietnam, without distinction of their political tendencies, in order to struggle and overthrow the rule of the U.S, imperialists and their henchmen, the Ngo Dinh Diem clique, and realize independence, dei mocracy, life improvement, peace, and neutrality in South Vietnam, and advance toward peaceful reunification of the fatherland, i FRONT "The program of the NFLSV includes the following 10 points i . 1-To overthrow the disguised colonial regime of the U.S. imperialists and the dictatorial Ngo Dinh Diem administration, lackey of the United States, and to form a national democratic coalition administration. "The present regime in South Vietnam is a disguised colonial regime of the U.S, imperialists. The South Vietnamese administration is a lackey which has been carrying out the U.S. imperialists political , lines. This regime and administration must be overthrown, and a broad national democratic coalition administration formed to include representatives of all strata of the people, nationalities, political parties, religious communities, and patriotic personages; to wrest . back the peoples economic, political, social, and cultural interests; to realize independence and democracy; to improve the peoples living  conditions; and to carry out a policy of peace and neutrality and advance toward peaceful reunification of the fatherland. M2To bring into being a broad and progressive democracy. "To abolish the current constitution of the Ngo Dinh Dien dictatorial administration, lackey of the United States, and to elect a new National Assembly through universal suffrage. 189     By NWD Date 201 I "To promulgate all democratic freedoms freedom of expression, of the press, of assembly, of association of movement..,(ellipsis as received); to guarantee freedom . of belief with no discrimination toward any religion on the part of the state; and to grant freedom of action to the patriotic political parties and mass organizations, irrespective of political tendencies. "To grant general amnesty to all political detainees, dissolve all concentration camps under any form whatsoever, abolish the fascist lav 10-59 and other antidemocratic laws; and to grant the right of repatriation to all those who had to flee abroad due to the U.S.-Diem regime 11 To abolish the economic monopoly of the United States and its henchmen; to build an independent and sovereign economy and finance, beneficial to the nation and people; and to confiscate and nationalize the property of the U.S. 'imperialists "and" theAruling clique, their stoogesI "To help northern compatriots who had been forced or enticed by the reactionaries to go south after the restoration of peace to return to their native places if they so desire... I 5To build a national and democratic education and culture ' w6To build an army to defend the motherland and the people. "To build a national army defending the fatherland and the people; and to cancel the system of U.S. military advisers... "To abolish all the military bases of foreign countries in SouthVietnam. 7To guarantee the right of equality between nationalities...; i to protect the legitimate rights of foreign residents and overseas Vietnamese. "To insure the right of autonomy of the national minorities; to set up, within the framework of the great family of the ; Vietnamese people, autonomous regions areas inhabited by minority peoples;...to abolish the U.S.-Diem cliques present policy of ill-treatment and forced assimilation of the minority nationali-ties.. i  I .190 I J I I     I . "To protect the legitimate rights of foreigners residing in Vietnam; and to defend and care for Vietnamese nationals abroad. I "8To cariy out a foreign policy of peace and neutrality' "To cancel all unequal treaties signed with foreign countries by the U.S. henchmen which violate national sovereignty. "To establish diplomatic relations with all countries irrespective of political regime, in accordance with the . principles of peaceful coexistence as put forth at the Bandung conference. "To unite closely with the peace-loving and neutral countries; and to expand friendly relations with Asian and African countries, first of all, with neighboring Cambodia and Laos "To refrain from joining any bloc or military alliance , or forming a military alliance with any country. "To receive economic aid from any country ready to assist Vietnam without conditions attached. 9To establish normal relations between North and South Vietnam as a first step toward peaceful reunification of the country. "The urgent demand of our people throughout the country is to reunify the country by peaceful means. The NFLSV undertakes the gradual reunification of the country by peaceful means, on the principle of negotiations.and discussions between the two zones of all forms and measures beneficial to the people and fatherland. ; . Pending the national reunification, the governments of the two zones will negotiate and undertake not to spread propaganda to divide the  peoples or favor war, nor to use military forces against each other; to carry out economic and cultural exchanges between the two zones; and to insure for people of both zones freedom of movement, of livelihood, and the right of mutual visits and correspondence. "10To oppose aggressive war and actively defend world peace. I "To oppose aggressive wars and all forms of enslavement by the imperialists; and to support the national liberation struggles of peoples in various countries191 i . t       "To oppose war propaganda; and to demand general disarmament, prohibition of nuclear weapons, and demand the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. "To support the movements for peace, democracy, and social progress in the world; and to actively contribute to the safeguarding of peace in Southeast Asia and thc world      STATEMENT OF CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF NFLSV. MARCH 22, 1955, ' PROCLAIMING THE NFLSVS FIAT POINTS CONCERNING THE WAR IN SOUTH VIETNAM AND ITS SETTLEMENT (According to a Liberation Radio broadcast of March 23, 1965, in Vietnamese to South Vietnam, the NFLSV Central Committee held an important press conference to proclaim the NFLSV1 c five-point Utatcnc-nt concerning tho escalation of the war. The lengthy statement contains only a small paragraph on negotiations. It states ,!at present all negotiations are useless as long as a. The U.S. imperialists do not withdraw all the troops, weapons and means of war of the United States and its satellites from South Vietnam and destroy their military bases in South Vietnam; IT b. "As long as the sacred rights of the South Vietnamese people--rights to independence and democracy--are still sold by the Vietnamese traitors to the U.S. imperialists; c. "As long as the NFLSV--true and only representative of 14 million South Vietnamese people--does not have the decisive voice.") . FRONT ".Atthe press conference, Chairman Nguyen Huu Tho proclaimed an important five-point statement condemning the syst  c war-seeking and aggressive policy of the U. S.imperial ift-in South. Vietnam and enunciating the heroic South Vietnamese peoples unchanged standpoint which is resolutely to kick out the U.S. imperialists in order 1. We understand that the correct Vietnamese translation of this point states that negotiations are useless as long as the U.S. imperialists'have not yet withdrawn all the troops, etc. ' 193 ' .     in order to liberate the south, build an independent, . democratic, peaceful, an neutral South Vietnam, and achieve national unification. Here is the NFLSV statement about the intensification and enlargement by the U.S. imperialists of their aggressive war in South Vietnam "...Faced with the present and extremely grave situation, the NFLSV deems it necessary to solemnly proclaim once more its unchanged stand of struggling GENEVA against the Americans to save the country. The U.S. imperialists are saboteurs of the Geneva Accords, extremely rude and cruel aggressors and warmongers, and deadly enemies of the Vietnamese people' "...The Vietnamese people are well aware of the value of those accords. The Vietnamese people have always and correctly applied those accords and resolutely ' struggled so that those accords would be implemented in accordance with the spirit and letter of this international . document which has all the characteristics of legality. US MOVES On the other hand, U.S. imperialists and their lackeys in South Vietnam have gradually and in an increasingly ' brazen .martnertra.mpled onthe Geneva Accords and (wordindistinct) destroying those accords by openly waging . an atrocious viar in South Vietnam over the past 11 years with a vievz to enslaving and oppressing the South  "Vietnamese people, turning South Vietnam into one of their colonies and military bases)-and-partitioning'" . Vietnamese territory forever...Naturally the criminal actions of the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys aroused hatred throughout Vietnam and gave rise to a wave of boiling anger throughout the vzorld. Public opinion in Vietnam, public opinion in Asia, and the impartial public opinion the world over severely condemned and energetically protested against the cruel actions of the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys and loudly demanded that they put an end to their viar-seeking and aggressive actions against the ..South --f i' 194 .     South Vietnamese people and that they correctly implement the 1954 Geneva .Accords. But all this fell on deaf ears. The U.S. imperialists continued to trample on justice and to rush ahead with their piratical war in South Vietnam. 2 "2. The heroic South Vietnamese people are determined tbkick out-theU7Simperialists in order to lib. South Vietnam; build an independent, democratic, peacefu 1, a u tra 1 South Vietnam; and advance toward, national unification. "The South Vietnamese people are fond of peace, but the South Vietnamese people cannot stand idle and let the U.S. aggressors and their lackeys freely trample on the country and dominate the nation. They prefer death to bondage. The 14 million people have risen in . one bloc and struggled gallantly to defeat the U.Sinvaders and the country-sellers, liberate South Vietnam, achieve independence, democracy, peace, and neutrality in South Vietnam, and contribute to maintaining (peace in Indochina?) and southeast Asia. US MOVES .To escape this dangerous situation, the U.S. imperialists are engaging in extremely dangerous adventurous military actions. The fact that they introduced into South Vietnam combat units of their air, naval, and ground forces, additional U.S. weapons, and mercenaries from South Korea and other satellites and used planes to bomb the DRV and the Laotian Kingdom and so forth does not reflect their strength at all. On the contrary, these are the crazy actions of a (hooligan?) who, faced with deadlock, engages in adventurous actions. They cannot threaten anyone. By its nature, the U.S. imperialist scheme of intensifying and enlarging their present aggressive war reflects one of their humiliating defeats. It proves that their ll-year-old colonialist and aggressive policy in South Vietnam and their so-called special war have gone bankrupt. ...Since 2 The preceding part was not numbered. ' 195      " Since the U.S. imperialists have bogged down ' and almost died during the special war, they will be completely wiped out in (the regional war?). If they dare to extend the war to North Vietnam, to all of Indochina, and further, they will face more humiliating defeats more quickly. Previously, with empty hands the southern poplo doalt heavy blows on the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys and fulfilled a great and glorious revolutionary task. Now, with their own strength, with the wholehearted support of powerful North Vietnam and the rich and powerful socialist countries, and with the sympathy, support, and encouragement of the Asian, African, and Latin American countries and all peace-and justice-loving peoples the world over, the South Vietnamese people will surely and gloriously triumph over the.U.S. aggressors and their lackeys in any regional or special war waged by the latter. Now more than ever before, the South Vietnamese people must firmly hold rifles in handand struggle to achieve their fundamental goal, which is to kick out the U.S. imperial i$ts and build an ind pendent, democratic, peaceful, and neutral South-Vietnam US MOVES 11 The NFLSV asserts once more that the U.S. schemeof introducing U.S. and satellite air, naval, and ground . force units into South Vietnam and bombing North Vietnam and Laos to reduce the combativity of the South Vietnamese people, to stop the aid of the North Vietnamese and world peoples to the just struggle of the South Vietnamese people, and to create astrong position from which theycan. force the NFLSV and the South Vietnamese people toNsell their fatherland to them cheaply through certain nego-tiationsisonly anempty dream of men who are crazy politically and adventurous tailitarily. The South Vietnamese peopleinform the U.S. imoerialistsandtheir lackeys 'You are hooligans. You are stupid. How can you hope to deceive people when each time-after hitting the north vzithout warning you repeat agaihand again that you dohotintehdtoeh'largethe war,that 196      that the attacks are retaliatory measures, that the attacks are aimed at bringing about negotiations, and so forth? You are more stupid when you say you want to negotiate front a position of strength. The South Vietnamese people point their fingers in the faces of the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys and tell them 'Your only way out is to withdraw from South Vietnam. If you stubbornly pursue the war, you will suffer the greatest and most humiliating defeat you have ever suffered.1 FRONT "...At present all negotiations are useless as lone as the U.S. imperialists do not vzithdraw all the troops, weapons, and means of war of the United States and its satellites from South Vietnam and destroy their military bases in South Vietnam; as long as the sacred rights of the South 7ietnautesepeople --rights toinde pen dance and democracy--(are still sold?) by the Vietnamese traitors t.o the U.S, imperialists; and as long as the NFLSV"tfue andpnlyre preset million South Vietnamese people--does not have the decisive voice. With regard to the South Korean clique and other satellites of the Americans who are planning to introduce mercenaries into South Vietnam, the South Vietnamese people tell them the following .Although you are involved in waging the war, you will never be given your share. You are simply shameful scapegoats for U.S. imperialism. Since nearly 30,000 U.S. generals, field grade officers, and men with nearly half a million lackey troops are being heavily beaten by the army and people in South Vietnam, what can a handful of you do? "...3. The heroic South Vietnamese people and liberation trooos are determined to fulfill their sacred fission which is to chaseaway the U.S. imperialists to liberate South Vietnam and to defend North Vietnam. Vietnam is one, the Vietnamese people are one, north-and south are one. Their affection is as high as a mountain and as deep as the sea. This truth is as sure as the sun rises in the east. Nothing can change it. In their hot and deadly 197      deadly struggle against the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys, the South Vietnamese people have always received the great and extremely precious assistance of 17 million northern brothers. The northern compatriots are enthusiastically working day and night for the southern part of the country. 11 On behalf of the 14 million South Vietnamese people, the NFLSV wishes to extend its full confidence and unchangeable promise to the 17 million northern compatriots. The South Vietnamese people are determined to fight and defeat the U.S. imperialists. The heroic South Vietnamese people and liberation troops are determined to fulfi . .air sacred missionto chase away the U.S. imperialists, to liberate South Vietnam, to defend the north, and to advance toward the reunification of the country"...The NFLSV always relies primarily on its own force and ability, but is ready to continue to receive all assistance, moraland material, including assistance in weapons and war materiel from the socialiscountries and nationalist countries, all world organizations and all peace-loving peoples thiPOWp;hout yhe world. Moreover, the front reserves for itself the right to buy weapons and war materiel from any country and organization ready to sell them to the South Vietnamese people to help them strengthen their defensive potential.  "...All people must be united. All people must be armed and must heroically continue to move forward with the determination to fight to win over the U.S. enemy and the Vietnamese traitors. "...We are absolutely convinced that we will certainly be victorious. We also pledge to our beloved Vietnam that we are determined to strike strongly, truly strongly; to strike to the last man, to the last breath, to the last drop of blood; and to strike very accurately at the heads of the U.S. enemy and his lackeys. We are det ermined to liberate the south, protect the north, and reunify the father1and. 198      STATEMENT OF NFLSV CFTR.' L COMMITTEE SPOKESMAN . ON MAY 12, 1965, REITERATING THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE'S STATEMENT OF MARCH 22, 1965 (Liberation Radio broadcast on May 14, 1965, in Vietnamese to South Vietnam, a May 12, 1965 statement of a NFLSV Central Committee spokesman. The broadcast reiterates the NFLSV's five points. It also comments on recent U.S. actions, including "the economic trick called cooperation for eConomic development" and the creation of "smokescreens of deceitful peaceful negotiations". The statement stresses the role of the NFLSV as the true master of South Vietnam.) "The South Vietnamese people, as well as the Cambodian people and other fraternal peoples in southeast Asia and throughout the world, will never forget the past 11 years of misery, shame and suffering caused ' by the 4 billion dollars of U.S. aid. President Johnson made a great mistake. U.S. dollars cannot corrupt, seduce, or subject the Viet-  namese and other Asian peoples. (?We say) to the U.S. imperialists face that the Asian peoples, with their culture dating back thousands of years, with their traditional respect for justice and disdain for ill-gotten wealth, and with their respect for moral principles and virtues, can never be subjected by violence. Poverty cannot change their hearts and misery cannot soil their purity and honor. You U.S. imperialists are conceited and disdainful, because you are well-off, but you have gained and will gain only insults, shame, and bankruptcy. Your 4 biIlion dollars cannot purchase (few words indistinct) South Vietnam and cannot purchase peace for the pirates. "At present, with even 40 billion dollars you can purchase only the souls of a few more scores of country-selling, traitorous Vietnamese such as Ngo Dinh Diem and Phan Huy Quat. Formerly, in order to deceive, the fascist Hitler had to invent something called spiritual values. Today U.S. President Johnson need only vzear dollars and guns on his chest in place of a religious medal US "At present, it is obvious that because of their heavy military M defeats and their considerable political isolation, the U.S. imperia-0 lists have resorted to the economic trick called cooperation-for-deve 3 Ippntet d idle label of false pec.ce while stubb6rnlyintensifyingarid S expanding the war of aggr ion against our country. 199      "What is noteworthy in this trick is the U.S. imperialists' evil effort to create a smokescreen to Cover up their colonialist and bellicose nature ancT their new foolish military actions in South Vietnam and North Vietnam. Of course, if the U.S. aggressors carry out agc-r'essidn'by resorting to military means, we the Vietnamese people, will fight; if they carry out aggression by resorting to the label of false peace, we will fight. We will fight until final victory, until not one U.S. aggressor remains on our Vietnamese territory. To carry out their colonialist, aggressive policy, the U.S. imperialistshave resorted to numerous cunning stratagems and tricks and (word indistinct) the traditional wicked effort to sow disunion "Is the South Vietnamese peoples resolute struggle against the aggressive U.S. imperialists .to save the country and win back independence and freedom and unjust struggle? Is progressive mankind's spiritual and material assistance to our struggle for national liberation, including weapons and (few words indistinct), an illegal act? Is it incorrect to say that the foreign intervention in many forms that aggravates the Vietnamese situation is none other than the war of aggression waged by the U.S. imperialists against our country? What is the significant Johnsons unconditionalnegqtiations? Do they mean that pur people, must, lay .down their weapons and receivethe JJ.S- bandits' in their homes,as honored guest's? "At present, the nationalist countries in southeast Asia and . Africa Constitute a great force unanimously supporting the Vietnamese people's patriotic struggle. Therefore, in their attempt to isolate us and reduce their shameful isolation, the U.S. imperialists have not conoealed their evil and vile intention of sowing disunion among them and taking advantage of them. But in face of the correct attitude shown by these nationalist countries, Johnson has lost his enthusiasm. It is crystal clear that the U.S. imperialists are very cruel and cunning, especially when they have suffered heavy defeats and are on a desperate path. However, diamond cuts diamond M "As everyone knows, the British government is a cochairman of the rf 1954 Geneva conference on Vietaa Is responsible (?for implement-A gng) the accords signed at this conf even ce.  "Ye t' at present, Prime T Minister Wilson continues to assert that his policy is to agree and 1 s'upport-the U.S, imperialists1 acgressivpoiicy andwar in South K Vie tn ar.. At present, -Prime Minister '.fils on is'carrying out the duty of a stooge for the U.S. expeditionarpi troops,whilePreside.nt Johnson is calling for peaceful negotiations.  "Now more than ever, all the U.S. imperialists deceitful and psychological warfare measures are useless, no matter how cunning and brazen. It cannot be otherwise. Even their most recent measure (?has only aroused) the anger of progressive mankind and millions of honest American people. 0 N T For our part, our stand is extremely sl'ear ?he NFLSV 22 March statement has.fully. ref lecte.d the unchanged aspirations, stand, and detan in ion of 14 million southern people. .It is also the unswerving line of the Nl the onlv legal and true representative of l4 million southern comoatriots--- .. .,  200 .     "1The U.S. imperialists are the saboteurs of the Geneva accords, the extremely rude aggressors and warmongers') and the" deadly enemy of the Vietnamese people. "2The people of heroic South Vietnam are resolved to kick the U.S. ixaper ial is ts outt liberate South Vietnam, build an in . n , democratic N pe snd neutratIoith Vietnam)arid"advance'"toward ' national unification. "3The people and liberation troops of heroic South Vietnam are resolved totulfill completely their sacred duty, 'which is"to'kick"the JJ.S. imperialists out in order to liberate South Vietnam and protect North Vietnam.  "4Th South .Vietnamese people are deeply grateful to all the peace-andpeace loving peoples-throughout the vorld for their warm support and declare that they are ready to receive any aid from friends on the five continents, including . other war materiei-.-' "5All the united and armed people are rising up heroically in order resolutely to defeat the U.S. bandits and their lackeys. In the name of 14 million South Vietnamese people, the NFLSV solemnly declared in its five-point statement that "the South Vietnamese people and their armed- forces are-resolved not" to "abahdoh- their "weaponsaslong-as their Haslc objectivesindependence, democracy, peace, and heutrli'ty not achieved." "The South Vietnamese people are resolved to continue dealing heav blows to the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys in order to achieve final victory. All negotiations V7iththp US. imperialists at the present time are-entirely meaningless unless the U.S. imperialists with draw" ill troops and war materiel and v7e apori sdf tneUnited Statesmans its satellites from South Vietnam and destroy all their military bases in South Vienam, unless the Vietnamese traitors stop sacrificing the South Vietnamese peoples sacred rights to independence and democracy and unlesstheNFLSV the only truereVres"ehta.'t'ive"of"14 million South Vietnamese peoplo--has the right to express ' their decisive vpice. "Through the U.S. presidents 7 April speech, and (several words, indistinct) one can see that the U.S. imperialists are extremely frightened by the brilliant image of the NFLSV, the single and genuine representative of the South Vietnamese people and the organizer and leader of the South Vietnamese peoples struggle for self-liberation, against the U.S. imperialists1 warlike and agressive policy and against the oppression of the lackeys and traitors to the fatherland. The NLFSV is the image of the solidarity and unity of all patriotic and democratic forces in South Vietnn. The NFLSV is now the true-master of South Vietnam and controls -our-fifths of the territory and io  millionpeople. With its liberated armed forcesDnd-para7xlTtary forces, the NFLSV is the victor which is smashing the strength of the U.S. imperialist and colonialist aggressors. 201  Section 3.J    "Everyone knows that (few words- indistinct) the USSR, China, and the socialist countries have been actively supporting the South Viet-nam.ese people in their struggle for self-liberation. It is thus clear that the South Vietnam revolution has beer, organized and led by the NFLSV. This truth is as shining as the sun. The U.S. imperialists, the most stubborn people, cannolonger deny that the South Vietnam problem cannot be solved without the NFLSV and without the NFLSV plate-ffoPm ah w clacisfvb clopqnt in view ox tho yrs,ent balance O- forces m South' Veetnam) "In Vietnam, in Asia and the world, where will the U.S. imperialists go if they stubbornly continue to intensify the war in South Vietnam and to strike North Vietnam? It is clear that in the present situation in our country, President Johnson can only choose and is obliged to choose one of these two decisions either to prolong and expand the aggressive war in our country or to follow the way out reserved for the U.S. imperialists that is, to quit South Vietnam as soon as possible.. "As for the South Vietnamese, and the rest of the Vietnamese people, they will continue the resistance for five or ten years more. In reality we will have to lose only (word indistinct) final vict cay will certainly be ours. The South Vietnamese and Vietnamese people have sworn that they prefer death to bondage, and they are determined to fight until final ictory, and to exterminate the U.S. bandits to the last man in their country, no matter what sacrifice they have to endure "In the struggle against 14 million South Vietnamese people, you are unable to win and are, on the contrary, being bitterly defeated, and now you are planning to (?fight) all 31 million Vietnamese people. It is true that you want to rush to death, unless you are great impostors (few words indistinct) the people of North and South Vietnam have answered and are answering you (few words indistinct) all the people are prepared and (passage indistinct) 700 million peoples of the brotherly countries, with their fraternal close friendship are also ready to cooperate closely with the Vietnamese people in resolutely exterminating the U.S. aggressors to the last man if they venture to expand the war to North Vietnam and Indochina and encroach on China. FRONT "At present, it is clear that it would be wise for U.S. officials to .withdraw all. troops, of.the.United States and its satellites and weapons and war material from South Vietnam and let the Vietnamese people settle. their..ov;naffairs-in .accordance wfth the-NFLSV-plateformand .stop thsireoression against- North Vietnam. This is the only way out which (few words indistinct)." 202      NFLSV CENTRAL CCHITTEE STATtrNT OF JUNE 12, 1965 ASSAILING U.S. AGGRESSION (Liberation Radio released cn June 14, 1965, a NFLSV Central Committee statement of June 12, 1965 aimed at "the U.S. imperialists new adventurous acts and deceitful tricks" of escalating the war in South Vietnam. It also reiterates the NFLSVs five points of March 22.) US MOVES "...During the past few months, faced with heavy defeats, the Johnsen government "has openly and directly carried on the plan to intensify and enlarge cheTjTS. aggressive war in our country ItVt.tiiuude-an those cfa group' of100percent colonialists. Regardless of public opinion and international law, the U.S. administration has ordered units of U.S. combat exoeditionary troops and troops from satellite countries sent to South Vietnam with an unprecedentedly great quantity of weapons and war material "Faced with these concrete actions, can one say anything except that the U.S. authqritiesare crazily enlarging their despicable aggressive war in Vietnssi? Is it possible to believe that tl ctions are.anfeSuations of President Johnson's genuine desire for peace and of the U.S.authoritiesj detemirustion to respect and protect the l954GeneVaaccords on Vietnam? A normal man one who is not crazy and who is not an accomplice of the U.S. bandits must conclude that the actions of the U.S, imperialists are the rudest possible aggressive and warlike actions "Thus, while intensifying and enlarging their aggressive war, they set forthdeceitful peace proposals. Recently U.S. President Johnson, with one hand, raised high his command baton thus giving the signal for U.S. officers, soldiers, planes, and warships 'to'come to South Vietnam in large numbers and with the other hand, held high the ragged faked peace banner. In a series of speeches aimed at explaining U.S. policy, JohnsotVconco.. el the most deceitful arguments, espeCiaDy in the speech delivered in Baltimore on 7 April. --------- ' ----, , ------------  . "Concerning so-called unconditional discussions, Johnson contradicted himself in trying to explain the content of his policy He said that the Americans would stay in South, Vietnam at any cost and that the Americans are preparing for a long and continuous war. This is the same as if Johnson ordered the South Vietnamese people to lay down their vreapons and surrender to the Americans in order to have the so-called peace that would be enjoyed in their lifetime only as slaves to the invaders and traitors. Theresult of the U,S. authorities1 trick of unconditional discussions would be that the Americans wbulacontinue to occupy and rule South Vietnam and that Vietnam would be partitioned forever.- "Johnson set forth conditionsnot only fordiscussions, but also for arriving at discussions. The U.S. authorities continuously shouted that if the-Vietnamese refused to hold discussions with them, they would destroy Vietnam on an unprecedented scale. This means that the U.S. administration 203 .     gives itself the right to wage aggressive wars and sow destruction at any moment and any place in accordance with its colonialist desires. "In fact, Johnson's arguments about peace discussions constitute a policy of brazen banditry. That is why the South Vietnamese people are not alone in 'their hatred of the U.S. bandits and their determination, millions as one, to oblige the latter to pay for their crimes and why the world peoples, including the U.S. people, are also angry at them. (Several words indistinct) the Vietnamese people have estimated their strength and (?clearly realized) the extremely cruel nature of U.S. imperialism, the international gendarme. They are resolved to keep thoir word wo prefer to die than to become slaves and to fight to vanquish the U.S. bandits. "Johnson also, in explainin'-; why the A.Tp'icansareat tacked, invented the legend that North Vietnt . wades South Vietnam and that China forces the Vietnamese-pe eo'struggle against the''Americans Then he invented thc tricks of escalation and'discontinuatiortof bombings of North Vietnam, without taking pains tdfiide fils sinisterche5eb'f' fdrcingoin;'country and China to negotiate with thc U.S, bandits. It is obvious that those arguments are both deceitful and contradictory that the Vietnamese aggress against the Vietnamese and that the Americans are under attack although their country, in which there is not one single liberation soldier, is separated from Vietnam by a whole ocean. It is necessary to remind the U.S. authorities that the Vietnamese nation not only has personal experiences in the struggle against colonialism and imperialism, but also has survived and prospered by itself for thousands of years before the birth of U.S. capitalism. In fact, it is necessary to stress that the rudely aggressive and warlike policies and acts bythe U.S. authorities CT our-country during the last H years ("especially during the last few  months, have erased for a long time theoretically as well aspractical1y the temporarydenarctLon line atthp l7th parallel which divides Vietnam into two zones north and south. Our compatriots in both North and South Vietnam"C?cleem"xt)necessary and consider it a sacred duty to pay attention to and settle definitely this problem, "ft is clear that" the U.S. authorities have-intentionally fired smoke flares with a view of escaping the court of world public opinion, including that of U.S. public opinion, which .is severely denouncing the U.S. imperialists as colonialist aggressors and war criminals in Vietnam. They thought that in so doing they could sow disunity inside the steel solidarity bloc of the Afro-Asian peoples who are actively directing the spearheads of their attacks at the common enemy the U.S. imperialists. They were, however, greatly mistaken. ' FRONT "It is clear that in inventing the legend of aggression against South Vietnam by North Vietnam, the U.S. authorities have intentionally concealed a real fact which has been considered as striking truth. It is the South Vietnamese people's patriotic struggle itself, jchichhasbeen waged under Thebarr.er of the NFiSV the organization that represents them truly. Naturally, Xll deceitful and threatening actions of the U.S. imperialists are "completely ineffective 204      ,The NFLSV sternly warns the U.S. imperialists that if-they stubbornly continue to step up and enlarge their aggressive war, 31 million Vietnamese people certainly will not tolerate their crimes; their blood debts should be paid for by blood; and that the U.S. imperialist failure will be extremely lamentable and will happen within a shorter period of time. At present, no cunning ruse of the U.S. imperialists and no reactionary power in the world can ameliorate their deteriorating deadlock situation in South Vietnam ,!In view of the fact that the U.S. imperialists are recklessly (?embarkin FRONT n a new military adventurous step, the NFLSV finds it necessary to assert onct again the unchanged adamant stand ana determination of 14 million South Vietnamese,people, which was clearly stated in the front's five point statement of 22 I-arch. The South Vietnamese people and their armed forces are deter--, mined ncverto lay down anas before achieving their basic goal of independence, democracy, neace, and neutrality. The South Vietnamese people are determined to deal thundering blows onto the heads of the U.S. aggressors and their henchmen and will surely achieve final success. At present, all negotiations with the U.S, imnerialists are uselessif theU.S.Imperialists have not yet withdrawn from South Vietnam all the troops and war equipment and means belonging to them and their satellites, if the Vietnamese traitors continue to kneel down and offer the U.S. imperialists the South Vietnamese people's sacred rights concerning independence and democracy, if the NFLSV the unique legitimate representative of 14 mill ion South "Vietnamese people as not allowed to raise its decisive voice, and if the U.S. imperialists stil 1 Refuse to stop air strikes against the norchmm-parttTfNNu .U 11 .     NFLSV RESTATES PEACE CONDITIONS AGAINST MILITARY ESCALATION (On September 29 Hanoi broadcast in English a statement released on September 25 by the Presidium of the Central Committee of the NFLSV condemning expanded U.S. and South Vietnamese military operations in Vietnam and reiterating the Front's conditions for a settlement of the conflict.) .Therefore, thc presidium of the NFLSV Central Committee deems it necessary to declare solemnly once again thatifEhe U.S. imperialTsusrcfuse to withdraw their troops and dismantle their military bascs in South Vietnam but continue to send more troops and build new military bases, "refuse"! stop all war acts but continue to use B-52's and other aircraft and artillery to carry out vranton bombardments against the South Vietnamese pcople, if they refuse to stop using Chemicals and other lethal gases, refuse to stop their bloody repression of unarmed people's demonstrations and definitively put an end to their public execution or other acts of murder of prisomers of war, political detainees as well as demonstrators, if they do not respect and implement thc 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam in the spirit of respecting the independence arid sovereignty of the South Vietnamese neopicT, and leaving the 1 after alone to settle their own affairs, if they persist in their stubborness, there can be no contact nor political solution vrith them. It is impossible to have conditions leading to a real and guaranteed peace in South Vietnam as long as the South Vietnamese army and people have not yet completely defeated the U.S, aggressors and completely liberated their country" . 206      RETYPED FBIS 50 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY NFLSV SPOKESMAN IN ALGIERS . PARIS AFP in English 1346Z 20 Dec 65 E (Text) Algiers-A-leading member of the South Vietnam National Liberation Front, Huynh Van Tam, said here today there is no question of negotiating a peace settlement in South Vietnam as long as it is occupied by the Americans. Huynh Van Tam, who expressed his faith in final victory, said his National Liberation Front now occupies four-fifths of Vietnam, containing 11 million out of 14 million inhabitants. He said All negotiation with the Imperialists would be absolutely useless at this time as long as they have not withdrawn all their troops and all their war material and those of their satellites outside South Vietnam. Referring to recent statements by U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Huynh Van Tam warned against fallacious American declarations of peace. All such declarations always had been followed by a new U.S. war effort, he said, he added that Vietnam had known 31 days of peace in 25 years of struggle. Huynh Van Tam claimed that in one month, between 15 October and 15 November, the National Liberation Front had destroyed more than half the number of planes and more than all the enemy tanks put out of action in the first nine months of the year. He was giving a press conference under the auspices of the Algerian National Liberation Front, during the Algerian-Vietnamese Solidarity week. Speaking of French President Charles De Gaulle, he said the NFLSV appreciated the realistic positions he adopted, he added Our position vis-a-vis France is very clear We consider President De Gaulle's position on the South Vietnamese problem to be realistic. Here, in Algiers, we have relations with the French Embassy. V<e do not consider France to be a satellite of the United States. He said he had never had discussions or official or unofficial meetings with representatives of President Johnson or of U.S. satellite countries. He charged that Britain, though not the British people, (word indistinct) in the forefront of American satellites. It was followed by countries that sent mercenaries to Vietnam or helped the U.S. war effort these were Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, Japan, South Korea, Nationalist China, and so forth, he said. 20 Dec 1524Z RWAC , 207     FBIS 43 LIBERATION RADIO ON BOMBING SUSPENSION FOR YOUR INFORMATION LIBERATION RADIO (CLANDESTINE) IN VIETNAMESE TO SOUTH VIETNAM AT 2330 GMT ON 10 JANUARY 1966 CARRIES A SIX-MINUTE COMMENTARY ENTITLED "THE MONKS CLOAK BEARING THE U.S. TRADEMARK CANNOT COVER UP THE TRUE NATURE OF A BRIGAND, WHICH HAS NOT BEEN REVEALED." THE COMMENTARY SAYS "THE U.S. AGGRESSIVE CHIEFTAINS HAVE RECENTLY INITIATED THE SO-CALLED TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM TO CREATE CONDITIONS FOR NEGOTIATIONS. THIS IS A SORT OF U.S.-LABELLED MONKS CLOAK DONNED BY CHIEFTAIN JOHNSON IN AN ATTEMPT TO COVER UP THE U.S. IMPERIALISTS' NEW DARK PLOTS AND ACTIONS." LIBERATION RADIO CONTINUES "AT PRESENT, THE UNITED STATES WANTS TO USE THE TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM AS A CONDITION FOR THE NORTH. VIETNAMESE PEOPLES WITHDRAWAL OF SUPPORT FOR THE SOUTH VIETNAMESE COMPATRIOTS. THE CUNNING U.S. MANEUVER IS TO MAKE US TAKE THE AGGRESSORS FOR THOSE ATTACKED." "IN INITIATING THE SO-CALLED TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM," TEE COMMENTARY CONTINUES, "THE UNITED STATES EXPECTS TO REAP WHAT IT HAS NOT OBTAINED ON THE BATTLEFIELD. FOR THIS REASON, WHILE SHOUTING THAT THE BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM HAS BEEN TEMPORARILY SUSPENDED TO CREATE CONDITIONS FOR NEGOTIATIONS, THE UNITED STATES HAS STRIVEN TO DOUBLE ITS MILITARY EFFORTS IN SOUTH VIETNAM. AS EVERYONE KNOWS, WHILE CARRYING OUT THE SO-CALLED TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM, THE UNITED STATES HAS HAD ITS AIRCRAFT INTENSIFY THEIR ACTIVITIES IN SOUTH VIETNAM." LIBERATION RADIO CONCLUDES "THESE FACTS ARE ENOUGH TO SHOW US THAT THE PEACE DOVE OF JOHNSON IS REALLY THE DECEITFUL MANEUVER OF A MEAT-EATING MONK. BECAUSE IT IMPLIES A NEW PLOT TO ESCALATE THE WAR OF THE U.S. IMPERIALISTS. THE MONKS CLOAK OF SUSPENSION OF BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM TO CREATE CONDITIONS FOR NEGOTIATIONS CANNOT COVER UP THE TRUE NATURE OF A U.S. BRIGAND, WHICH HAS BEEN COMPLETELY EXPOSED. 11 JAN O815Z' AHDGS 208      SOUTH VIETNAM 3 February 1966 . NFLSV WILL NOT RECOGNIZE U.N. DECISIONS ' Hanoi VIA International Service in English 1749 GMT 2 February 1966B (Text) Hanoi, 2 February--The NFLSV today declared that the United Nations has no right to decide on problems of the South Vietnamese people and that it will consider all decisions of the U,N. Security Council on Vietnam as null and void. In a statement made by its Central Committee spokesman and released by South Vietnam LIBERATION PRESS AGENCY, the NFLSV said According to western reports, on 31 January, right after sending planes to resume the bombing of North Vietnam, the U.S. authorities requested a meeting of the U.N. Security Council so that they could present a complete report on Vietnam and a resolution which might open the door to negotiations. This is an arrogant and perfidious move of the U.S. imperialists. By resuming its air raids against North Vietnam, after failing in their peace efforts farce, the U.S. imperialists once again crudely challenged the Vietnamese people and all of peace-loving and justice-loving mankind. Yet, they try to gloss over their unjust act by asking the convening of the U.N. Security Council, attempting to use this organization to spread their fallacious good trill for peace, slander the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, and distort the just struggle for national salvation of the South Vietnamese people in the service of their schemes and acts of increasing and widening the war. During the pause in the bombing of North Vietnam, to open the tray for negotiation, the U.S. imperialists continued to send reconnaissance planes to make repeated encroachments upon the airspace of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, sent 13,000 additional U.S. troops to South Vietnam, increased raids and massacres, and committed many new crimes against the South Vietnamese people. At the same time they used the U.S. Air Force for intensive bombings of the liberated areas of Laos, instigated the Thai and South Vietnamese puppet armies to launch repeated provocative attacks against the border areas of the Kingdom of Cambodia, and made active preparations to increase and expand the war in Indochina. All the aforesaid acts of the U.S. imperialists have laid bare the essence of the so-called U.S. peace efforts and have been condemned by public opinion all over the world. Decidedly, the U.S. imperialists cannot use the U.N. Security Council to cover up the truth and justify their schemes and acts of aggression in South Vietnam, still less to negate the South Vietnamese people's right to self-determination and force them into submission. The NFLSV energetically condemns the U.S. imperialists bombing of North Vietnam, intensification of the aggressive war in South Vietnam and Laos, and their attacks of provocation and sabotage against Cambodia. The U.S. imperialists must bear full responsibility for all the extremely serious consequences arising from their acts. The NFLSV resolutely exposes before public opinion the perfidious attempt of the U.S. imperialists to hide under the U.N. banner to intensify their war of aggression in South Vietnam and sabotage the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. 209      3 February 1966 SOUTH VIETNAM The NFLSV solemnly declares that the United Nations has no right at all to decide problems of the South Vietnamese people. The front will consider all. decisions of the U.N. Security Council on Vietnam as null and void and as an act of encroachment on the principles of independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity of Vietnam which were guaranteed by the 1954 Geneva agreements on Vietnam. The only correct solution to restore peace in South Vietnam is that the U.S. imperialists must withdraw all troops and weapons of the U.S. and its satellites from South Vietnam, dismantle all U.S. military bases there, and let the South Vietnamese people settle by themselves their own internal affairs. Should the U.S. imperialists refuse to abandon their aggressive ambition, they will in no way be able to avoid complete and most ignominious failure, whatever barbarous and perfidious maneuvers they may resort to. 210       . ' ''  . ' ,- a.' . SOUTH VIET N A M . 21 July !9o6 . NFLSV PRESIDIUM HAILS PRESIDENT HO'S APPEAL Liberation Radio (Ciandestine) in VietnaneSe to South Vietnam P5?0 GMT 20 Juiy 11966S (South Vietnam National Liberation Front IiFLSV Centra! Ccrsnittce Presidium Statement, 20 Juiy)  . (Text) On !? Juiy President Ho caHed on the conpatriots and combatants throughout the country to step up resoiutdy the resistance war against the U.S. inperiaiiSt aggressors, to protect the north, to Hberate the scuth, and to advance toward the reunification ' of the country. President Ho said .For the sake of the fatherland's independence and out of a sen?c of duty toward the poop1es who are struggHng against U.S.' inperiaiism, aH of our people and combatants are united and of one mind, are not afraid of sacrifices and hardships, ar.d arc determined to fight untU compiete victory.  . Aiso on 1'1 July, President Ho ordered partial.' mobiUzation in'.the north in order tostep up the resistance war. Thc NFLSV warniy responds to thc appeal of President Ho, the ieader of a!3 the peopie, and regards-this apnea! as a rejection of our peopies stand, wiH, and aspirations. Tim HFLSV warmiy aedaius this new effort of the northern peopie, in contribution to the sacred anti-U.S. nations! siivation struggle of the entire peopie. This is a tremendous encouragenent for the southern eocpatriotS on the anti-U.S. frontline. Thc NFLSV is deeply gratefu! to our northern compatriots for the unreservcd support of the beloved north for South VietnamThe entire peopie and Liberation Armed Forces in South Vietnam are resoived to devote aH of their materia! and morai strength to fuifiUing their duty to the fatheriand Defend the north, iiterate .thesouth, and reunify thc. country, ..This is a sacred c  duty and a high honor, The southern combatants and peop!e, who do not spare their b1ood, are resdved to furfill that duty at any cost. The U.S. imperiaiiSts arc piunging more deeply into the criainai war of aggression in Vietnam. After being defeated in their speciai war, tltey have sent U.S, and sateHltc troopsto occupy South Vietnan brazeniy and have intensified and escaiated the war of destruction against North Vietnan, They have even attacked the Hanoi and Haiphong areas. In South vietnam, they have occupied many cities and territories of our fatherland, used aH kinds of weapons to kit! our peopie, and applied the scorched-earth "burn a11( kiH an, destroy al!" poUcy. They have kiHed o!d as weH as young people and nen as woH . as wor.en in bath the cities and rura! areas. Worse stiH, they have kiHed innocentchildren. ' In North Vietnam, they have indiscriminate! bombed and strafed hospitais, Schools, factories, dikes, and dans in order to sew tiourning and destruction, and thereby force our peopie to submit. In the worid, they have professed the wiH for psaee negotiations to foot, pubiic opinion and concea! their ex trendy ruthless, brazen, warmongering, aggresSivc faces. But, our peepie are determined not to Submit, nor are they ictting themseives be fooied by the U.S. 1Ir.peria3.ists 211 .     23. Ju!y !9u6' .   SOUTH VIETNAM The South vietnanese peopie. who have tong nurtured a deep hatred for the U.S. agyresSors, are resoived not to tolerate then or Uve with then under the sane sky. Rivers may run dry and mountains nay wear away, but the oatn of determination not to serve as staves of the aggressors taken years ago stiH retrains fresh in the  ninds of the South Vietnamese peopie. As months and years go by, it wiU become even nore resounding. The South vietnanese people, together with the peopie throughout the country, are determined to fight the Americans until conpiete victory, even though they have to . fight for 5, !0, or 20 years, or ionger. Like thc poopie throughout the country, the South Vietnamese peopic ardentty cherish peace. To our peopie, peace means that not a singio U.S. aggressor or mercenary renainS on Vietnamese sol! to provoke war against our peopie. This is the on!y way to restore peace. As ions as the U.S. imperiaiists cling to our country, the South Vietnamese wiU continue to fight theta untit independence and democracy are achieved and peace is accordingiy estabiiShed. Responding to President He's sppeai, the peopie and the Liberation Armed Forces in South vietnam arc deternined to strive to learn from the northern people, to emuiate one another in scoring achievements in aH fields, and to step up the nations! salivation reaistancc war. The southern array and peopte- are determined to march forward urgentiy to annihiiate and uhittie down many more forces of the U.S. and puppet arny, and in the immediate future to score the greatest victories in all activities during the current rainy season. Thc southern array 2nd peopte are determined to overcone all difficulties and hardships to buildup their forces in al! fidds, enthusiaSticaUy step up the novenent to join the liberation arny, or offer free iabor, or Join shock youth tear.S in order to contribute to ths victory. The southern army and peopic- are determined to maintain and expand the Uberated areas, to ding to their land and houses, to strive for an increase in production, and to foH the pacification ptan of thc U.S. aggressors and their iackeys. The Southern urban pc-cpie are deternined to strengthen and broaden unity, bulid up a strong force, step up the struggie against the.U.S. imperiaiists and their iackeys to achieve nations! and democratic rights and vita! interests, obiiterata the oppressivc machinery right in thc heart of the cities, and be ready to take advantage of opportunities to score great achievements. Our arny and people are victoriousiy fighting against the U.S. imperialists and their iackcys and wiU certainly win conpiete victory. The resistance car of oup araies and peopic is nakine big tcapS forward. The situation at hone and abroad is very favorabie for us. Our arny and ceopte wilt, certainty defeat the U.S. Imperia!iSts, as they once defeated the Japanese fascists and the French coioniaIlsts. i .- Signed The NFLSV centra! Coanittee Presidium, Scuth Vietnam, 20 July 1956. I .    SOUTH VIETNAM . 22 August i?66 NFLSV ATTACKS PEACE FARCE 0? ASA COUNTRIES . 'Hanoi WA International Service in English 0552 GMT 22 August J966--B (Text) Hanoi, 22 August--The spckesnan of the CocnisSion for Externa! Reiatic.-.s of the South Vietnam National Liberation Front (NFLSV) issued a statement or.  !9 August Stroniy condemning the so-called peace initiative of the- Association of Southeast Asia (ASA) countries regarding a soiuticn to the Vietnam problea. The statement, rdeased by the South Vietnam LIBERATION PRESS AGaNCx, said As is known to everybody, each tine the U.S. inperlaiists take a new Step in expanding their mr of aggression in Indochina, particularly in South Vietnata, they stage a new peace farce in an attenpi to nislead public opinion and nitigate the wrath of the Vietnamese people, the people in the United StateS, and othcr peace-loving peopie of the world. In a few nonths, the stater.er.t went on, the chief car criminaiS, Johnson, ttcfa.-ara, and their acco.-pliceS, have introduced int.o South Vietnam some iO.CCO additional U.S. troops. They are preparing to increase the number of U.S. troops in this area to tOO.OOO, 500,000. or even none by the end cf this year. BeSideS, they have pushed their war escalation in North Vietnam to a very dangerous decree by combine severa! areas in the periphery of Hanoi and HaiphongThe statement strongly denounced the willfu?. U.S. servants in ThaHand, the . Philippines, and Malaysia for contributing to the U.S. aggreSsiVe war in Vietr.ap while brutally rcpreSSing the novenents for genuine independence and peace at heme!t pointed out that the Thai ruiing cirdeS, utoare noiSiiy campaigning for a ; peace conference of Asian countries, arc actually those Who have teen noAt zealeuSly serving thc aggressive U.S. pUns in southeast Asia. They have not only sent Thai navy and air force units to South Vietnam to take part in the U.S. inr but also offered ai! of ThaiIand to the U.S, Imperialists, turning their country into a hue U.S. base of aggreSSicn a-ainst Vietnam and other countries in Indochina and southeast Asia. The Statenent continued- It is thus stark clear that the Aka peace initiative is but another peace farce of the type already staged by the Johnson-Dean eRusk dicue aimed at serving the U.S. SchemeS of var expansion and intensification against the Vietnamese people and other psoplea in Asia. -Ke ASt peace proposal colls for settlement o' Asian prooieaS by Asian, tat in fact it serves the classic U.S. policy of usir-i Asians to fight Asians. That is why severa! Asian countries have Sternly condemned and rejected the proposal. Thc statement stressed The NFuSV ones again reafiims its inr.ovatle Stand that so Jon- S the U.S. ir.perla!ists have not recognised the South Vietnamese peoples legaI right tc independence, de-ocraey, peace, neutrality, and national remiificaticn, 50 ionc as they have not evacuated all U.S and satemite troaps and weapons fro- South . Vietnam and dlsr-.an.led ,12 their atiitary baseo in this area, so ion- as they have not reconiced the NJisi as the only genuine represOptative of the South Vietna-ese people, and so ion- as they have not ict the South v.e.n?.r,esc people settie thOir internal affalrs the-seives. there will be no genuine peace in South vietna.n and all conferences c.n the Scuth viet.-.ar. issue will be null and vole. .. ' 213- '     22 August 1966 ' ' SOUTH VIETNAM After reiterating the South Vie th me sc peopie's determination to carry through to the end their reSiStance against the U.S. aggreSsion, for national Saivation, the statement strcScca Any peace frauds of the U.S. aggressors and their sateUites, including the co-caHod Asian peace conference proposed by Thaiiand at U.S. instigation, win end in ignominious ,fai!uro.' iTRX-THIEf PROVINCES URGED TO FIGHT HAHDS.R  Liberation Radio (dandcStine) in Vietnamese to South Vietnam O5OO CMT !9 -August !966--S (Connentary "The troop's and pcople of Tri-Thien nuSt strike r.ore strongly, uninterruotediy, and Spontaneously") ..- (Excerpts) Quang Tri and Thua Thien are the two northornnost provinces tying dose to the southern side of the temporary border. Thc U.S. aggressors and their iaekeyS have attennted aH ruthiesS.nd .insidious plots to transfer.- the Tri-Thien provinces into an aboduteiy safe area for them. ASide fren the police, civii guards, and Ranger forces, they have stationed the First Infantry Division of the puppet army in the Tri-Thien area in addition to one armored resilient, tour U.S. Marine battaiions, and recently, three to five airborne and r.arine .battalions of the puppet .amys genera! reserve which have been regu!ar1y depibyed in the Tri-Thien theater ,r war. A network of posts dot the area from Route 1 and Route 9 to inter-provincial roads. Moreover, the U.S. aggressors . have built specia! forces camps Connanded -irectiy by the Americans aions the . ViethaoeSe-Laotian border. t  In conjunction vith the aiUtary measures, the U.S. aggressors and their iaekeys have resorted to bribery and flattery to buy off thc peepie of Tri-Thien, . particuiady those who Jive dose to the demarcation line. However, the . indomitable peopie of Quans Tri ana Thua Thien, bearing in mind the tpoueht of . attacking the enemy, have braveiy coved ahead to wage po.itica! and arned struggt.es at the sane tine and .are winning creator and greater successes. With ardent patriotism,, r-.e peopie and youth in Hue have risen to face the enemy with fora; of Struggie ranging from neeticgs and denonstrations to denomce thc enemy1S crimes to arned occupation of the Hue broadcasting station, the. ranScakinc of the U.S. information office and the U.S. Ccnsuiate, and . denonStraticnS to denand that the Americans go home and that the Thieu-Ky ciicue . , be overthrown. Prop tov-ns and nunicipaiitieS to rura! areas, succeSSive ? politica! struggj.es have erupted to check the Moody hands of the cnenyr . The guerrilia warfare which has beer, vigorousiy deydoped in the mountainous areas as weH as in the Icwlands and ccaStal region has delivered stunning biowS to the enemy's head, fiank, and back. The guerriHas have not cniy Surrounded, encroached on the enonys territory and ferced hie to withdraw fre.n sor.e 1 posts such as the A Luoi outpost in western Thua Thien, and sniped at and kiUed dozena of A.-ericans at Phu Bai each month, but have aiao reguiariy ,attacked the wicked Sdf-defense.r.en Ln the Support of our compatriots Hving . in Strategic hadets. The ruerriHaS and re-iona! troops have a!so iaunched successive attacks againat; Route $ and against nUitary convoys on the Da lianC- Hue Highway, have destroyed bridses and attacked reinforcements ce-in- to repair the bric-es or roads, and have reeutariy shcHed the cneny's salutary sub-cector.  214      .. ,- ' fS . UNCLASSIFIED 'i # .  FAR EAST Interview with the VC on Huntley-Brinkley ShosIn a 10-minute film interview made August 27 with NBCs Sander Van. p-1 ocur and Tran Haoi Nam, NLF representative in Algiers, the following points were developed ' a. Peace.- According to Tran, real peace can only come to Viet-Nam when the U.S. and its allies withdraw all their . troops and dismantle their bases. Until then the South Vietnamese people resolve never to give in. b. A CeasefireThe U.S. talks of peace and negotiations but each, time it is preparing to send more reinforcements to . , escalate the war. At the same time U.S. rulers try to fool world opinion by blaming the Vietnamese people for not negotiating. The U.S. is attempting to change its position ' of weakness on the battlefield to a position of strength at a conference table. This is a move to cover U.S. weaknesses i. and to hoodwink U.S. public opinion.  c Political Aims of the NLFTo overthrow thc disguised colonial government; to form a coalition of all elements in A South Vietnamese life and hold general elections; to set up a progressive democracy; this unaligned government would   . .215 .     ' -As;,  O .UNCLASSIFIED ') ' .  . ' v establish, diplomatic relations with all governments in the Fspirit of the Bandung Conference, and would accept aid from all countries; it would desire to live in peace with its neighbors. I d. Unification of the two Viet-Nams J Thc Front stands . r r -r -r-  r. ' u -u u r  . X . J r ... .n . for gradual unification by discussions and negotiations between . the two zones. It would hold elections with this in mind, the same elections spoken of before. Organized general elections are not possible as long as the U.S. does not vzithdraw its presence. The present election plan is a political bluff and will not be recognized by the Liberation Front.  ' e. PrisomersAs long as the U.S. does not recognize .the Liberation Front, it.is not possible to discuss the exchange or release of prisomers. f. Meetings tilth U.S. OfficialsLeaders of the Front have never . met with U.S. officials. We consider any U.S. <. proposal for meetings now as a cover up for the aggressive' plans of President Johnson and-his intentions to hoodwink U.S. and world opinion.' g. 1954 Geneva Accords  The essential spirit of the 1954 Geneva agreements recognizes the independence, sovereignty 216 .     UNCLASSIFIED and territorial unity of Viet-Nam. While the NLF did not participate in the Accords and is not hound by them, neverthe-less the NLF is in agreement with the basic principles of the Geneva Accords because they represent the just aspirations of the Vietnamese people. h. PostscriptTran Haoi Nam added at this point in the interview his thanks to those members of the intelligentsia, workers, students, and religious groups in the U.S. who manifest and have manifested solidarity with the struggle of the Vietnamese people. (UNCLASSIFIED) NBC News Huntley-Brinkley Report, 831 1945 217      SOUTH VIETNAM . 14 September 1966 BURCHETT INTERVIEWS NFLSV PRESIDIUM HEAD Liberation Radio (Clandestine) in Vietnamese to South Vietnam 1000 GMT 13 September 1966S (Text) On 25 August, Australian journalist Burchett met with lawyer Nguyen Huu Tho, chairman of the NFLSV Central Committee Presidium, in a place in the liberated area of South Vietnam. During this meeting Australian journalist Burchett interviewed Chairman Nguyen Huu Tho about the development of the war in South Vietnam and about the policies and line of the NFLSV, the only true leader of 14 million South Vietnamese people in the struggle against U.S. aggression. Here are the questions and answers of this interview Question Since the day the Americans started their military buildup in South Vietnam and escalated their air war of destruction to North Vietnam, have the basic combat objectives of the NFLSV been changed? Answer Our unchanged combat objectives are to completely defeat the aggressive war of the U.S. imperialists; to overthrow the Saigon puppet authorities; to set up a wide and democratic national coalition government composed of representatives of the people from all strata, all nationalities, all religions, all political parties, and patriotic personalities; to restore the sacred national rights of the South Vietnamese people; to achieve independence and democracy; to improve the living conditions of the South Vietnamese people; and to achieve peace, neutrality, and national unification. The intensification and widening of the aggressive war by the U.S. imperialists has demonstrated that our previous assessment of the U.S. imperialists nature and plans is completely correct. Since nothing is more precious than independence and freedom, we feel it impossible to detach ourselves from these basic combat objectives, no matter how savage the U.S. imperialists' means of war are and no matter how cunning their political tricks are. All the people and armed forces in South Vietnam are determined to fight and fight strongly. Final victory will surely be ours. Question Is it true that the introduction of U.S. and satellite troops into South Vietnam has shrunk the liberated areas and reduced their population? Answer Nothing is farther from the truth. (?It is true that) in certain areas, at certain times, the U.S. imperialists have occupied a small portion of the liberated areas. But, generally speaking, we have enlarged our areas and liberated an additional million people (?in very) important areas. I must add that although at present almost 4 million of our compatriots still live in disputed areas and areas under temporary control of the enemy, the great majority of these people including officials,soldiers, and officers of the Saigon puppet authoritiesare fed up with the Americans and their lackeys and feel sympathy for and support the front. Question A number of people are of the opinion that neither the Americans nor the NFLSV trill win militarily in South Vietnam. What do you, Chairman, think of this view? 218 .     14 September 1966 SOUTH VIETNAM Answer These distorted opinions have usually been set forth by the Washington ruling circles so that they could present themselves in a favorable light by restricting the importance of our victories and making everyone doubt our chances of achieving complete victory. In fact, we have achieved victory after victory in the struggle against the U.S. aggressors and their lackeys. We have defeated the "special war" strategy and overwhelmed the puppet troops who have been organized, equipped, trained, and commanded by the Americans. Rushing in to participate directly in combat since mid-1965 by massively introducing their troops in South Vietnamincluding the seasomed units of which McNamara has often boastedthe U.S. imperialists have been unable to change the situation. On the contrary, they have suffered ignominious defeats. The fact that the Pentagon is continuing to pour more troops into South Vietnam, raising the total strength to 300,000 men, and is making preparations to send more reinforcement troops is eloquent proof that the South Vietnamese troops and people are winning, have the initiative on the battlefield, and are attacking continuously. It is necessary to recall that at one time McNamara promised to withdraw U.S. troops from South Vietnam by the end of 1965. The ignominious failure of the 1965-66 dry season counteroffensive of the Anerleans, although the latter had carefully worked out the plan and (several words indistinct) forces, proves that they have been powerless in carrying out their plot aimed at recapturing the initiative and changing the war situation. Participating in glorious combat with their bare hands, our people have quickly built a firm, strong political and military force and are achieving increasingly important victories. The Americans have the most powerful military and economic potentials in the Western world, but we have the invincible power of the peoples war and the creativeness which is being developed to a high degree. we are of the opinion that in a war, military power is composed of many factors, the most decisive being the political and moral ones. Politically and morally we are absolutely stronger than the Americans. Our people across the country are carrying out the war without yielding before sacrifices and hardships, with the determination never to put down their weapons so long as our combat objectives have not been reached. we are also stronger than the Americans in other basic factors, such as strategy, rear areas, war leadership, and ground forces; these are the factors that decide the final victory of a tzar. Although they are strong materially and technically, the U.S. bandits have basic weaknesses in the political, military, strategic, and tactical fields. The factors of U.S. power are not limitless, partly due to their policy of dominating the world, to the fact that they are undertaking an aggressive war in our territory (several words indistinct), and partly due to the fact that they are powerless in (several words indistinct) any portion of our territory (several words indistinct). On the contrary, their weaknesses are truly basic and unsurmountable. 219      lb September !9o6 'SOU-. VIBTiJAM During the process of war devdopiasnt, these basic weaknesses have- beco.o inc x-p 3$ J nR.y obviouS and proninent and wiH finaUy iead thc Americans to an unavoidable d-f-at. The ever great victories which we have achieved since the U.S. miii'mr buildo. and especiaHy during the dry season, prove that theofoicaHy as WC-t- as .practicaHy we arc- fuHy abic to exterainate not only the puppet troops, but aiso the post seasomed units of the U.S. expeditionary force; va are- fuHy able; to Maintain the initiative on the battlefield and tr.c tempo ' r cur attacks and wearc fuHy able to victorious!- oppose the new b.S. reinfc.reeuents and nUitarHy defeat the U.S, aggressors unde1 any situation. '  ----------------------------------------------z . Question In your opinion, chairman, is there not; a possibility of cooperating with the other poUtica!. organizations in South Vietnam? Ansuer Our unchanged poiicy has aiways been to achieve a Dirge degrsO o? nationa! unity -3in?J at carrying out the resistance against the U.S. aggressors art for naticn-it satvatien. Thanks to this correct udicy, we have succeeded ir. building a nattonn vnivec front based on a sound foundation and having a iarge ncmberShip. Apart from patriotic poUtica! parties, roUgious and national groups, and indi-viduais who have Joined the front, wc have succeeded in cooperating with ether patriotic poUtica! and rdigious organizations andir.dividuais. On this basis, vc have scored great victories. At present, the U.S. troopa are- direcUy participating on a iarge Sdc in the appresiiive war in South Vietnan, tranpUn-; underfoot our country, using extreneiy crud tncanS of war to massacre our compatriots, and conmltting extrendy barbarous rines. Thc traitors Jtguyen Van Thicu and Nguyen Cao Ky have ful!y obeyed America?. r'terS and have sold nations! sovereignty' for U.S, dotars and ueapcnS. Jievcrthcicss, apart from a snaH group of reactionaries dependent on thc Americans, all other Vietnamese are patriots who fed great indignation toward the U.S. aggressors and their henchmen. Therefore, we can say that there is a possibility of cniar-ging our cooperation with other organisations, forces, and individuatS in South Vietnan, rcgardicSS of their previous .activities. Question By this, do you mean ali the peop1c who had participated in the Ngo Dinh Diem goverrncnt and the governnionts that Suoccedcd it? Answer Yc.. RegartD.css of their past activities, poUtica! tendencies and views, or their nationality or rc1ir.ion, (few words indistinct) aimed at the foHowing objectives opposition to the war of tr.c Americans and their henchnOn, restoration of natior.ai sovereignty, achievement of denocratic freedoms, cessation of tr.c U.S. intervcr.tior.ist. and aggressive poiicy, achievement. of peace- snd neutraHtv in South Vietnam, and Improvement of the living conditions of tr.c people. But the- strength of thc NFISV poUtica! and mUitary forces vIH certainty be the decisive factor for victory. Question Chairman, can you iet us know thc conditions for a poUtica! sduticn to thc South Vietnam proticn 220      3.4 September Xctu ' SOUTH ViDTNAM Answer For nany months the Johnson ad.-iiListration has never stopped trunpet-inp about the so-caUed "desire for peace'1 end the unconditional negotiation proposal. Those honey-like cords, howeverj are in fv.lt contradiction to the U.S. Government's crininai acts. At the very tine when the PreSident of the united States and his Secretary of State utter fine words, the U.S. Gpvernrmnt expands the aggressive vac in South Vietnam and continues to escalate the bombinss against north Vietnar-. Vlashinston wants the VigtnaTor.c peopIe co accept its conditions this r t' i- wants vr- to srpnAk1'- But the determination of our people and the KFLSV to restore the sacred national sovereignty and to liberate the country is unshakable. Wc are ready to ficht to the end, athough we will have to fi;ht for 3.0 or 20 years or longer and will have to'face innutnerab1c chat tenses, and we Kill fight until the territories inherited from our ancestors are liberated fretn the U.S. aggressors yoke. After enduring a war situation for ?0 years, the Vietnamese pcopie are eaocr for peace co that they can reconstruct th-air country. But peace mist bejjchiey.ed on the basis of independence and democracy. The U.S. imperia!lets are invaders in South Vietnsn. The U.S. inneriaiists have trampled underfoot the basic national Sovereignty of South Vietnam Therefore the conditions for a genuine peace in South Vietnam and, at the same time, for a single and correct.solution to trie South vietnam probien can oiJy be 1-TheAraeui e.?.nsrmst..e.C<lLhea S2ro?siy ie tnari, withdraw U.S. trooiiand weapons and those of t reir s. tell ices froi Sout h Vietnam, arm dismandfc ail U.S. niUtary bases in South Vietnam. ?--The Auericans muSt respect the (?nationa1) rights of the Soltuh Vietr'-vd-6 peoniej That is)-independence, ctenocracy, peace, and neutrality. The internal problems of South Vietnam must be soived by the South Vic-tnanese pcop3c theu-seiveS and withJUt foreign intervention. Reunification of Vietnam nust be decided rn by the pcopie of both zones 3Tnc tiFbSV, theoniy legal representative of SoidhTietnatA bo mpCSent at anrt'hayc>-?.-de>c?.S.ivvv.oiceillaJlvpplltl.ca1..so1v.tion in South Vic-tnan. Question Chairuan, can you teH us the results of the fact that the Americans have used modern neane of war such aS B-52 bombers and (few words indistinct)? Answer Resorting to barbarous ueans of war such as B-52 bonbers, tortic pas, and poir-onouS chemicals, and to a scorched-earth policy of kiH all and destroy and burn everything, the U.S. inperialists want to oppress our people and force us to surrender. But those means of warcan only enhance our compatriots' indignation at the aggresSors and further strengthen their deternination to fisht bravdy until final victory, in defiance of all diffi-culties. The use of a strategic air force (?for tactical purposes) is a Hast resort in the war and proves the confusion of the aggressorS; it wiH not bring then the expected results, as you can see. 221      5 September !%7 4- ' "4 SOUTH VIETNAM <TEXT OF POLITICAL PROGRAM ADOPTED BY IJFLSV Hanoi VKA Internations! Service in EngHsh IjiO GUT t. S?p 67 B Text HanoiFollowing is the full text of ths poUtical program of tho Scuth Vietnam Nations! Front fcr Liberation adopted by an extraordinary congress of the Front convene! by its Central Corrcittee in rd-August !9-7. The program was distributed to Vietnaness and foreign presSmen'at a nowS conference bera today by Nguyen Van Tien, head of the NFLSV permanent reproSentation in North Vietnam L Political. Program of the South Vietnam National Front for Liberation V In i960, the South Vietnam Nations. Front for Liberation car.i3 into being with its W-point program aimed at uniting the entire-peopie against the U.S. iraperiaHSts and their !ackey. Since then, the Front has achieved a broad union of the varioas SactionS of the peopie, the pditicet parties, organizations, nationalities, reii-ious communities, and patriotic perscnalities with z- view to Jointiy fighting against U.S. agcresSion, for nations! saXvation. It has successfully consoiidated its base anions the bread masses of the peopie; at the sane time, it has achieved joint action with many poHtica! and reIigieus forces and won over many industrialists and traders, many officiate. and functionaries of tile puppet administration. and many officer? and men of the puppet army, . Tire Front has constantiy enjoyed whotehearted encouragement and assistance from our ' compatriots in the north and abroad. It has a!so enjoyed ever stronger approva! and support fron the peopt.es of neighboring Camcodia and Loss, from the peopt.es of the Socialist, nationaiist, and ether countries in tte world, inciuding progressive peopie in the United States. Under the ieadership of the NFLSV, our peopte in the south have gone from victory to victory. The prestige of the Frort has been unceasing! enhanced at hone and abroad. The South Vietnam Natiora! Front for Liberation has become the soie genuine representative of the heroic South Vietnamese peopie. TheSe great achievements have proved that the line and poiicy of the front are correct, and that the strength of our peopie's unity and struggie is invincioIe, At present, despite heavy defeats, the U.S. imps ri ail sts ara stiH unwiHing to give up their aggressive deSigns against Vietnam. They are stepping up the war, tranpUng upon the south, and intensifying <? rn-v- of or-? countr"-. am monstrous crimes of the U.S. imperiaiists, however, have only served to deepen our peoples hatred and increase their indondtabte Hili. The peepie of South Vietnan, regardieSS of social standing, and even a nunbor of perSons in the puppet array and administration, have seen through the true features of the U.S, inperiaiists and their Lackeys, hate then, and want to contribute to the struggle against U.S. aggression, for nationa! salvation. Never before in our nation's history has the nettle of our entire peepie united for the fight to wipe out the enemy and sava the country been so strong as now. Our peopic are in a victorious, initiative, and offensive position. The U.S. inperiaiiStS and the iackeys hav e been increaSingiy driven into passivity and embarrassment; they are in an impasse and are sustaininc defeats.      5 September nIf'l SOUTH VJ ETI.'AM At this Juncture, in a spirit of devdopin- the former protean, thv HFLSV has woEtcd out titis politics! profran with a view to further brordentnc the b1c- of treat wtejn 1 union, cneoureLins and stimulating the entire peopie to rush forward, resulv.-d to figit and defeat the U.S. arossors, and to buHd an independent, democratic, peaeefu!, neutra!, and prosperous South Vietnam, X. Unite the Entire Peopie, Fight the U.S. Accressers, Save the Country. 1Durinn t,000 years of their history, the Vletnamese peopie have united and feuglt acainst foreign invasion to preserve their independence and freedom. Ever since our country was conquered by the French cotoniaHsts , our people have foL-ht unrer.ivtincly for their Uberation. In 3.95 > our people from north to south rose up, success miy carried out the August revolution, seized poUtica! power from the Japanese miUtarists and their lackeyS, and founded the Democratic Repubiic of Vietnam. When the French coioniaiists came back tc invade our country once asain, our entire peopie heroicaHy fouctit for neariy nine years, brought our sacred resistance to tne Great victory of Dien Bion Phu, Smashing the aggressive Schemes of the French colonialists and the interventionist poiicy of the L.S inperiaiists. The independence, sovereignty, unity, and territoriai integrity of Vietnam were fornaHy reconized by the 2.954 Geneva conference. Since then, our coir.pariots in South vietnam together wit., the peopie all over the country, shouid have been Living in peace and buHdins a free and happy Life. However, the U.S. imperialists have sabotaged the Geneva acre-enents, ousted the French cdoniaUsts, set up in South vietnan an extrer.eiy crue! puppet recime, ana tried to turn the southern part of vietnsm into a neocdony and a miUtary base in an attempt to protons the partition of our country, conquer the whoie of Vietnam, and impose their domination throughout Indochina and Southeast Asia. The U.S, imperiaiists have shrunk from no cruel method to carry out their dark design. Defeated in their specia! war, they have switched to a tocal war, using ever half a miHion U.S. and sateHite troops, a tong with more than haif a miHion puppet soidiers, for agcression against South vietnani. At the same time, they have undertaken a war of destruction against the northern part of our country They have aiso stepped up their speciai war in Laos and carried out continuai provocations ained at wrecking the independence and neutraiity of Cambodia. The U S. imperiaiists are daiiy causing untold sufferings and mourning to our campatriots throughout the country! They have resorted to all kinds of modern war means and weapons, inducting strategic aircraft, napain bombs, toxic chemicais, and poison fas tc massacre cur fellow countrymen. They have launched repeated operations, apain and again Sweepinc many areas, carrying out the kin ah, burn all, destroy all policy tc raze viHageS and haniets to the ground. They have herded the population, crabbed iand, and set up a nonan's Hand and fascist-type concentration camps dubbed strategic haniets, prosperity zones, resettienent areas, and so on. In the north, they have wmAcrAy bombed and strafed streets, viHages, industrial centers> and heaviiy popuiated areas. They have even struck at dikes, dams, schoois, hospitals, churches, and pagodas. Obviously the U.S. imperiaiists are the most ruthless aggressors in history, the saboteurs of the 195'1 Geneva agreements, the- saboteurs cf the peace and security of the peopies in Indochina, Southeast Asia, and the woridthe enemy number one of our pcorAe and of mankind. 223      5 September 1? SOUTH VIETliAM Over tile past few years, the U.S. imperiaiists have continue Uy etcalatsd the war, yet they have unceasinsiy clamored about peace negotiations in an atterr.pt to foci tr.e nerican and morid peepie, The Prison puppet administration has sold out South Vietnam to the U.S. inperiaXists. It has oppressed and exploited our southern compatriots in an extrendy ruthless uay. It. has forced South Vietnam youth ir.to the army to serve the united States in massacring our fellow countrymen. Ir. a demagogic bid, it has also staged the farce of working out a constitution and hoidine dections. It is only a clique of traitors, ar. instrument for the U.S. imperiaiists to enslaye the South Vietnamese people, prolong the partition of our country and further the U.S. war of aggression. s 2The U.S. aggressors and their lackeys think they can intimidate cur people by the use of force and deceive them by means of tric'.ls. But they are grosSiy mistaken Qur people definiteiy will never submit to force, never let the.selvec be deceived! Bringing into play our nation's tradition of undauntedness, our 31 miHion compatriots from the south to the north have resolutely stood up and united as one nan to fight againSt the U.S, aggressors and save the country, Qn the frontline of tne fatherland, our southern feliou countrymen Rave over the past lj years shown narvetcus heroism Irrespective- of age, sex, political tendencies, reXigious beliefs, and no matter whetherthey iive in the plains or in mountain areas, our people of all strata and al! national..ties have readuteiy fought Shoulder to shoulder to liberate the routh, defend the north, and proceed toward the reunification of tne .atheriand. since 1959-l9cO, our compatriots in the South Vietnamese countryside have carried out successive, sinuttaneous uprislngs, destroyed a series of concentration camps and prosperity eones of the U.S, imperialists and tne puppet administration and Hbcrated vast rural areas. Our armed forces and people than rushed forward, destroyed thousands of strategic hamlets, Uberated miHions of people, and defeated the U.S. special war. Since 1965. although the U.S. aggressors have brought in hundreds of thousands of U.S. expeditionary troops for direct aggression against South Vietnam, our arned forces and pcopie have repeatediy won big victories, slashed two successive U.S. dry-season strategic counteroffensives, defeated over . milion enemy troops--U.S., puppet, and sateHite. The liberated areas have continuous!y expanded and now make up four-firths of the South Vietnam territory with two-thirds of its population. In these liberated area, a nationa! and democratic power is taking shape ar.d a new life is biosstuning. in addition to big military victories, we have also recorded important successes in the political, economic, cultural, and diplomatic fieids. Ir. the bdoved northern part of the fatherland, our ip million compatriots are heroicaHy defeating the U.S. inperiaHst's war of destruction, maintaining and boosting production, and uhoXeheartedjy encouraging and helping the cause of liberating the south, thus fuifiing the obiigations of the great rear toward the great front. In the worId, the peopt.es of the rod 1st, nationaUct, and other countries, induding the progressive people in the United states, are sternly condemning the U.S. imperia!let's war of aggression, and are giving their appreva!, support, end assistance to our peoples strusc10 against U.S. aggression and for nations! salvation. 224     By NWD Date 201 I 5 September 1967 SOUTH VIETNAM Facts have clearly shown that the more the U.S. imperialists obdurately intensify and expand their war of aggression against our country, the more they sustain bitter defeats and are driven into isolation; on the other hand, our people win greater victories and get more friends. 3The most dangerous enemies of our people at present are the U.S. imperialist aggressors and their 1ackeys--the traitorous puppet administration. The tasks and objectives of the South Vietnamese people in the struggle for national salvation are now as follows To unite the entire people, resolutely defeat the U.S. imperialist's war of aggression, overthrow their lackey puppet administration, establish a broad national union and democratic administration and build an independent, peaceful, neutral, and prosperous South Vietnam, and proceed toward the peaceful reunification of the fatherland. The force that guarantees the fulfillment of the above task of fighting against U.S. aggression and saving the country is our great national union. The NFLSV constantly stands for uniting all social strata and classes, all nationalities, all political parties, all organizations, all religious communities, al 1 patriotic personalities, all individuals, and all patriotic and progressive forces, irrespective of political tendencies, in order to struggle together against.the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys, wrest back our sacred national rights, and build up the country. The NFLSV is prepared to invite and welcome all patriotic forces and individuals who oppose the U.S. aggressors to join its ranks, and to shoulder together the common duties. It proposes that any force which, for one reason or another, does not adhere to its ranks, take joint action against the common enemy--the U.S. aggressors and their lackeys. The NFLSV pledges itself to strive, shoulder to shoulder with the Vietnam fatherland front, to fulfill gloriously the common task of fighting against U.S. aggression to liberate the south, defend the north, and proceed toward the peaceful reunification of the fatherland. while fighting for their sacred national rights, the people of South Vietnam actively accomplish their internationalist duty. Their resistance war against U.S. aggression is an integral part of the revolutionary struggle of the people all over the world. The NFLSV undertakes to stand within the united bloc of the Indochinese peoples to fight against the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys, to defend to fight against the U.S. imperialists and their lackeys, to defend the independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity of Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. The NFLSV pledges to take an active part in the common struggle of the worldWs people against the bellicose and aggressive imperialists headed by U.S. imperialism, for peace, national independence, democracy, and social progress. 225      5 September 1967 SOUTH VIETNAM 4--The cruel U.S. aggressors are trampling upon our homeland. We, the people of South Vietnam, must stand up to make revolution and wage a people's war with a view to annihilating them, driving them out of our borders, and wresting back national independence and sovereignty. Having experienced over 20 years of war, our southern compatriots eagerly want to live in peace and rebuild our war-devastated country. But the U.S. imperialists have trampled underfoot this legitimate aspiration. That is why our people have to fight against them to win pea,ce in independence. Nothing is more precious than independence and freedom. Only when real independence is secured can we have genuine peace I 225a      Seyteihbe. -07 SOtlTIi VIETNAt X1O cncny of our nation is ruihless and obdurate, ... our entire peopic are determined to fiht and to defeat the U.S. aggrot 3 and theic iackeys. So icr as the U.S. InporiaUsts do not end their war of .cession, '.izidcaw al! U.S. ar.d catcHite troops from our country; and iet the Sou.;. Vletna.less people settle- then-sdvcs the interna! affairs of South Vie.tnur.i witho.t foreign intervention, our people uiil rcsolutdy fight on until total victory. The South Vietnamese peoples liberation uar is a lone and hard one, but it is sure to cm; in victory. Our people rely nainiy on their own forces; at the sane tine the; strive to win tha s;Tlpathy Support, and assistance of the world's pebplos. r To defeat the U.S. aggressors and their iackeys, our people do not spare z.rj Sacri-fl.ee, They enthusiastically contribute nanpower, nateriai rcsoucceS. and talent to the national liberation 'jar in the spirit of doins everything for victory. The 1IPISV undertakes to develop the Liberation Armed Forces eonprisInc the main force units, the regiona! troops, and ths militia and guerrilla units, with the a in o.r pronation peoptc'r. war, donbining guerrilla with recuiar warfare, wiping out as nany live eneny forces as possible, crushing the enemys will for accression, and winning -ne final victory. Tiw front .mdortatces to bund and dcvehvp the pbUtrea! forces of the masses., prenote the novenent of potitjcai strucEie. and conbir.e armed struae wl i political struccie and agitation among enemy troops, thus forming three Converging prongs to defeat the leny The NFLSV undertakes to cnurae all strata of the population in th a .owns and rural areas r>tHi under oncs? contra! to unite and struegle in every gossible for. to break the crip of the U.S. agcressors and thei? lackeys, destroy the Phuone (Corporations) and stratcfiAc hunlete, denand democratic freedom;; national sovereignty and a better life, oppose the plcssganging of troops and forcible Xabor draft- strule against onsiavina and depraved cuiture and march forward, tosether with the entire peopic, to overthrow .be enemy's cute and seize pnUtica! power. At the sane .me, the Front undertakes to encourage alt strata of peopte in the tibcrdteh araa. to unite closely to build thc peopte' s rclf--ianager?or. Syat -..i, to aciK-Ve ssep < step a iocal naiiona! democratic aduinissration, to bud base areas, tn st run? io eiuee and fight against U S. acereSsion a mJ for national salvatnm.   pee end '.i.  a co cd settlement of tm agrariar. quest ion, to toild te nou ceT-nv u.-ut tvim.' uf the liberated areas, to foster the peopio's foreas vt'.-i . vin.- -j ;;i.il-i < . ."lc;; for rhe froT. 11 n2 and ca;Tying the reslatance war tbrmpl to car-p-lcte victory, U. Build at Indopcadont, Dciocratic, Peace-fui, tL l'as. and Pl-opcrcus 3aut . V.einan T.-.e people of Sout Vle.nam arc- detc-mined to defeat the U.S, arjGrcss <U and . .ci. iackeyS; and to devote their niebt and main to buHd a pontica! sypteu ibat simcailtees the indej-L-nduncc and sovereignty of the nation and the .reedom and bappinesr of tie pOoytc, .a heat the wound, of uar, to liquidate tire sociat eviis left over by iR, U.S. puppet rcc-ne, to rectorc noral life and buiid an independent, damoeratic, peaeefr.!, ix-atra!. and prosperous South Vietnam. T- achieve these objectives, the UFISV Tays down the foUowinn concrete policies 226 .     5 September !9d7 OUTii VIET. 1To achieve a broad -nd progressive democratic recline To abolich the discuiSed colonist, regime established by the U.S. imperiaiists in South victna-, to overthrow thc puppet administration, hireling of the United States, not to recognize the puppet, nations! asSenbiy rigged up by the U.S. imperiaiiSts and their iaciteys, to abolish the constitution and. alt antinationaX and anti-der.ocratic laws enacted by thc U.S. imperialists and the puppet administration. Tc hdd free general eIections, to elect the national assembly inreally cenoeratlc nay in accordance with the principic of universal, equal, direct suffrage and secret baHot. Thio nationai asserib-ly idU be the state body with the nisilest in South Vietnam. It  iU work out a democratic constitution winch fully embodies the most fundamenta! and most eager aspirations of aH Social strata in south Vietnam and guarantee the estab!is Raent of a broad, progresSive, democratic State structure. To guarantee thc immunity of the deputies to the national assembiy. To rec up a nationa! union democratic government inducting the ;o.t representative persons amons the various Social strata, nati Qualities. religiour corciv.nlties, patriotic and democratic parties, patriotic personaiities, and forces which have contributed to the cause of nations! iiberatlon. To prodain and enforce broad democratic freedoms--freedom of speech, freedom of the press and publication, freedom of assembiy, trade union freedom, freedom of association, freedom to form poiiticai parties, freedom of creed, freedon to demonstrate. To guarantee to an citizens inviolability of the human person, freedor.i of residence , and Hedging, secrecy of correspondence, freedom of movement, freedom to work and rest, and the rieht to study. To enforce equaiity between man and woman and equality among the various natiormiities. To set free alt persons detained by the U.S. inperiaiists and the puppet edr.inistvation on account of their patriotic activities. To dissolve the concentration camps cet up in aH forms by the U,S. imperiaiists and their iackeys. Hl thcGG peopie cho have had to seek aeyium abroad because of the U.S. and puppet regime, have the right to return to the country to serve the fatheriand. To Severely punish thc diehard cruet, agents of the U.S. imperiaiists. 2--Tc bulId an independent and seif-supporting economy, to improve the osonic's living conditions. To abolish the poiicy of economic ensiavenent and nonopoiy of tile U.S. imperialists. To confiscate the property of the U.S. imperialists and their diehard crud agents and turn it into state property. To buiid an irxlependent and self-supporting economy. To rapicHy hea! the wounds of car, to restore and ,.eve!op thc economy so as to make the pcopie rich and the country pouerfu!. To protect thc right to ownerchip of the neans of production and other property of the citizens under the taws of the state. Co restore end develop agricultura! production. To improve farning, anismi husbandry, fish rearing, and forestry. 227 .     l September 1967 SOUTi VTitTIiAM m'ne state wiH cncoucacc the peasants to unite and help one another Ln boosting production, srant them ioans at !ow interest for the purchase of bufi'atoes, oxen, farming implements, agricuitura! machines. seeds, feet Itizers, etc, Help them develop irrigation works, and apply advanced techniques in agricuit-ure. To guarantee outiets for agricuttura! products. To restore and develop industry, small industries and handicrafts. To guarantee to the workers and empioyees the right to take part in the management of enterprises. The state wiH encourage the capita!ists in industry and trade to hetp develop industry smaH industries and handicrafts. To enforce reedom of enterprise to the benefit of nation-building and the peopie's weifare; to appiy a customs poiicy designed to-encourage and protechome product, ion. To restore and deveiop communications and transport. To encourage and step up economic exchanges between towns and country, between the piains and the mountain areas. To give due consideration to the interests of the smH traders and petty shopkeepers. To set up a state bank. To build an independent currency. To appiy a fair and rational tax poiicy The state wiH adopt a poiicy of granting ioans at tow interest to encourage production, and wiil prohibit usury. To deveiop economic rotations with the north; tne two zones wiH heip each other so that vtetnam's economy may prosper rapidiy. !n accordancc with the front's poiicy of neutraUty and on the principle of equality, nutuai benefit and respect for the independence and sovereignty of the vietnamese nation, trade with aH countries wiH be expanded, and economic and technics! assistance from foreign countries win be accepted, regardicss of poiitica! and socia! systems p--To enact the iand poiicy, to carry out the stogan "Land to the Tiller. 11 ib confiG-caie thc Xands of the U.S. ImpcrlaliSts and Ole diehard cruei iandlordstneir iackcys To allot those lands to iandtess o iand-poor peasants To confirm and protect the ownership of the lands aHotted to peasants by the revolution. The state- wiH negotiate the purchase of-land from iandtords wno possess band upward of a certain amount , varying with the situation in each iocaiity It wiH aHot these iands to iandIess or iand-pocr peasants. The recipients uill receive the iands free of charge and will not be bound by any condition wnatsoever. In areas Where the required conditions for tand reform do net yet obtain, iand-rent reduction Witt be carried out. To entrust the !ands bdonging to absentee land!ords to peasants for cuitivatic and enjoyment of the produce. Adequate steps wiH be taken on this subject at a iate, stage in consIdcration of the poiitica! attitude of each landiord. To ahow iandl to offer tar.d to the Liberation Peasants Association; the state wiH allot these lau to iandiess or iand-pocr peasants. To encourage uv -e orons or fruit-tree piantations to keep their farms soing. To respect the legitimate right to ownership oCand b; the churches, pagodas, and noty sees of rdigious sects. To carry out a fair and rationat. redistribution of communa! lands. To guarantee the iegltimate right to ownership of rectaimed iands to those who reclaim them. Those compatriots who have been forced into strategic hamiets, or concentration canps in any other form, wil! be free to return to their former viHaes. 228      ; ' 1 Set tember 1907  50 J?H ViSTHAH, Tnose fte have b-en compeHed to evacuate or to change asoaes and wno i. ish ' j go g Hvinr there, t i!! enjoy recognition of their ownership of tre lancs and otte property wnich Eave resulted from their laior, and .. til be heiped tc co- ineinung their Hving in the Sane piace; those who cist to return to nhrir native places ..-ill aiso receive help. 4--To ouitd a natlcnat democratic cuiture and education, to develop Science and -.ecF.oogv, co promote pubiic health. To fight, .against the Ame clean-type enslaving and depravea cuiturc and education now auversely affecting our peopie's fine, ieng-Standing ciaw-cat traditions. To build a nationai democratic culture and education, to devcioo science and technology in service of national. construction and defense To educate the peopie in the vtetnamese naion's tradition of scruggie against foreign invasion and its heroic history To preserve and deveiop the fine euiture ana good customs and haoits of our nation. To raise tnc peoples cultural standards t.o Hquldace iHiteracy, to promote compiementary education, t.o open new genertD education schools, higner learning es tabi laments, and vocational schools. To raatc an all-out effort to train and foster a contingent of scientific workers, technicians, and skilled workers. To use the V'ccr.ame&c ianuage as'-nc teaching medium in higher learning estab!ishments To reduce schooI fees for pupils and students. To exempt poor pupOs and students from school fees, or grant them schotarships. -to reform the system of examinations. Tire state WiH give every posslbie Help to those youth and children who have renderea services to the fight against U.S. aggression and for nationat saivatlon, to the ebiidren born into the famiHeS who nave rendered services to the revoiutien, and to other outstanding youths so as to enable them to study and develop tneir capabilities. Every citizen is free to carry out scientific and tcchnoiogtca1 research, to Induige in Hcerary and artisc-ic creation, and to participate in ocber cultura! activities. To encourage the inteiiectuais writers, artists, and scientistS and to afford thma the required conditions for reSearch work, creation, and invention in the service of the fatherland and the peopie. To afford opportunities to those cuitura! workers, writers and artists who have been persecuted by the tj S. imperia! ists and their iaciceys for their patriotic activities. To develop heaith service and the movement for hygiene and prophylaxis. To attend to the peopie's health. To control epidemics. To do acay ..it.h dansecous diseases ieft over by the U.S. and puppet regime. To deveiep r.he movement for pny&icat training and sports. To deveiop cultural reiatlons witn the nOrl; the two zones wiH help each other to raise the peopie's educat Lona ieve! and thc (doveiopnent) o" quailfiea pccpIe. To promote cuiturat reiations with foreign countries on the basis of equality and mutuai benefit;. 5To guarantee the rights and carer to the iiveiihood of workers, laborers, and c-vit servants. To prorauisate tabor iegiSiation, To put into practice the eignt-hour . worting day. To provide for a refine of rest and recreation. To set up a rational System of wages and bonuses for increased productivity. To improve tne livinc and working conditions of thc workers, laborers, and civi! servants. To appiy a poiicy of adequate remuneration for apprentices. To provide jobs to the workers and the poor peopie in the towns. To make every effort to do away vtth unempioyment. To put into practice a policy on soclat security to care for and assist workers, taborers, and civi! servants in case of disease, incapacitation, oid age, or retirement. To inprove Hvinr; conditions in working peopic's resldentia! quarters. 229  1,3526.     A----------------------------------------------; ----------- p Scpaeno-r i'iuV south viETEAH ' ' To settle disputes betreen employers and cnployeoa thraueh nejotietions between .ae tiza silos end mediation by the nations! dcnocratie adninistration. Tc str.ctij yrc-hibt the -eati'." of workers and laborers, to strietiy prohibit fines deducted fre. waces end unjustified sacking of workers. .--To buHd up strong South Vietnam L.uQrunon Armed Farces with a view to Ilberatinc the pcopic and defending the faSUerland. TN.e Mouth V-ctnar.; 1 beravton Ammd Feroes--compiistnc the ma in force units, the regional ornor r., and the militia and cuerriiLac--are the chiidren 01 thes peopie, and are bound1es>1y toyat. to the interests of thc ratheriand and the people, and arc duty-bound co fight shouider to shoutden with the entire people to ilbarate tne south, defend the fathcriand, and make an activeontri-ration to the defense of peace in Asia and in the worid. To pay due attention to the buitdine of the 1boration Armed Forces. To strive co raise their cuai.ty and Increase t-eir fichtinc er pa c ity with a view to stepping up peonies war, defeatinr she U.S satemite, and puppet troops, and brlncinc the fight asainot U.S aggression, for national sdvation to total victory. To strengthen the pclitica! work with a view to enhancin'; the patriotism and determination to ficht and to win of tne Ltberat.on Acr-ed forces. enhancinc the sonse of discipline, and concinuouSiy tichteninc the "fish and water" rotations between the army and the popuiation 7--T0 show gratitude to the martyrs, to cater for disabtoo arnymen, to reward the fi-hterS and compatriots who have an qutstandinc record in the fiht against U.S agression and Cor nationa! saivat-ion. The entire peopio are sratefu! to, and con- atnnSiy bear in mind the memory of the martyrs who belonged to the Liberation Armed Forces or to various services and revoXutionary organizations, and those tzho tail down their iives in poiitica! sr.rulet Their famiHes are catered for and assisted by thc state and the people. Aruymen and compatriots disabied in the course of trie armed and politicat struGsie are cared for and heiped. To reward in a worthy nanner ail fichters and compatriots who have an outstandns record in the struselc a-ainst U S agcreSsion crrt for national salvation The entire pcopie arc gratefu! to and heip thc faniiics who have rendered services to the ro Jiution. 3--To organize sociai reHef. To five reiief to the cocipatriots--victims of the war of assression unleashed by the U.S. imperialists and the puppet regime. To attend so orphans, old foiks, and invatid peopie. To orsance reiiof for the areas affected by nature! caiamitics or bad crops. Cansidermion is also riven to disabied puppet arr.v-man and to thc- far.ili.es of puppot arrryaen iclUed in action, who are poor and foriorr To help those peopJc driven to desperation by thc U.S. unperiatists and thel.- ide,".. to rcbui.td tRoir lives and serve the fatheriand and the poopic. ---To put into practice equality between man and uonan, to protect mothers and ci.-lir  To pay utmost attention to raisin- the poilSicai, cuitura!, and vocational standards o women in a manner fitting with their merits in the struvite against U S a-roSsion .-. ; for nation.! saivation, Tc develop the VietnameSC women's tradltionS of hcroisr., tm- dauntedness, ioydty.and aptitude to snouider every responsibiUty Women arc equai ce r.on poiiticaHy, cccnomicamy, cunuraHy.aud sociaHy. Women who do the sane Jeb receive the name Sdary and aHowanecs, and enjoy all other rights as men. Women workers and civit servants enjoy two months maternity icave with fum. pay bex'ore and after chiidbirtb. 230 .     5 September wb? SOUTH VTETWr Tc put into practice a poiicy of activdy heipinc perfectins and training wr. r. ca To premu .cate procressve marriage and family re-utations, To protect thc rhtc of notbers and chiMrep. "o develop a network of naternity homes, creches, and infant cc.sses. To do awry with si! sociai oviis broucht about by'the U.S. imperialists and their iackeys, w..ich arc hariaTu! 00 women's hcaith and dignity 1C--To strengthen unity, to practice equaiity and mutual assiStance anorc na-iondicicc. To abolish al! systems and poiicics appiied by the iraperiaiisis and their .act .7. with a view to dividinc. oppressing;, and expioiting the various nationalities. To eppoa-. discrimination amcns and rorcibto assiniiation of the nationaUties To jevep .no ions-stanclinc tradition of unity and mutuat. assistance arnone the various frc-terrm S nationaiitics with a view to defending and buiidinc the country All r.-.L .onities arc equal in X'ichts and obiisations. To imrAement the acrarian poiicy with regard to minority peasants To encourage and he!p them settle doun in fixed residences, to inprove them Jands, to deveiop eccrxsty and cuiture, to raiae their iivinc Standards so as to keep abreast of the general levet.. Tire nat ions! minorities have thc richt to use their own spoken and written iancuaseS to develop tha4 r own culture and art and to maintain or to change their customs and habits. To strive to train minority cadres so as to quickiy brine about conditions for cood rmnascmcnt of the ioeal affairs by the concerned minority itseif. In the areas inhabited by bio comnuniticS of a specific minority and where t-hc required conditions exist, autonomous zones wiH be cstabiished within independent and free vietnatn. Ii--To respect freedom of creed, to achieve unity and equality among the different reUcieus communities. To ficht against all maneuvers and tricks of the imperia!ists and their lackeys who use a number of persons under the cicak of reHgior. to oppose our peopics strucolo acainst; U.S, assression and fcr nationa! saivation, to sew lssen-sion between bdievers and nonbeIicvcrs and ano ns different re!iious communities, and to harm the country, the peopie, and the reUcion. To respect freedom of creed and worship. To preserve pagodas, churches, ho!y sees, tempies AH rdifions are equa! and nona is to bo diScrimincted acainst. to achieve unity among bdievers of various reliricnr and between believers and the entire nation for the sake of thc stru-gle acainst U.S. aggression and their Iackcys to defend and build the country. !2Wdcome puppet officers and men and puppet officials back to thc Just cause, shew icnicr.cy, and Give a humane treatment to raHied armymen and prisomers-oi-war. To oppose the U.S. imperialists and the puppet administration's attempts to presssanc mercenaries to serve the U.S. aecrcssors acainst the fatherland and massacre the pccpic. Tc severdy punish the diehard thuS actins as efficient agents of the U.S. lnperidists. To afford conditions for puppet officers and puppet officiais to cone back to thc Just cause and Join thc people's fifht acainst U.S. accrossion to save and build the country. 231      5 Soptcmboh !9b7 S0tTu vIETtul.' Tloce Irvicuals, groups, or units of the puppet army and mo.r.i strati on who render services to the cause of fighting against U.S agreecion for national saivation X 1 be rewarded and entrusted with responsible Jobs. Those '.ho Sympathize i.-ita and cupport thc strusclo against U.S. aECression for national dvttion or those who refUSe .to carry out orders of the United States and puppets to ham the pOopia Mil! have their nerits recorded. Those individuais, groups, or units who have broken away from the puppet army and voiuntarUy apply to join thc Liberation Avied Forces for fighting acainst the United States to eave the country are wdcomed and enjoy equal treatment. Regarding thoae Individuals or unite cho have broken away from the puppet army and adtniniStratiop and riser, against the U.S. aggresSorS to save the country, the front stands ready to join actions . ith them in the fight against the U.S. agnnessors on a basis of equality, mutual reSpsct, and assiStance So as tcgethcr to protect the peepie andiioOrate the fatherland. Those functionaries of the puppet administration who votuntcer to serve the country and the peepte in the State machine after the liberation of South Vietnam wiH enjoy aqua! treatment. Those in the puppet array and the puppet adninistratior. at any ieve! tho have committed crimes against the peopie but arc no; sincereiy repentant trill be pardoned. Those who redeem their crimes by Meritorious deeds uiH be rewarded accol'dingiy Captured officers and r.en of the puppet arny wiH enjoy humanitarian treatment and demency. Those in the U.S. Array and its satellite armies who cooss over to the peopie's side wiH be sivon kind treatment and heiped to return to their familier when conditions permit. Captured U.S. and sateHite troops wiU be treated es captured puppet troops. Xj-.To prolcct. the nchtc and intcreetS of overaeaS VietnanoSe To welcome the patriotism of overseas Vl'etnameSe and highly vaiue at! theii contributions to the resistance to U.S, aggression for national salivation af the peopie. To protect the rightS and interests of overseas Vietnamese. To he!p thoSe overseas Vietnamese cho wish to return to take pare in the buiiding of the? country. ll--Tb protect the iegitimete rights and interests of foreign residents in South Vietnar., Tc udcone those foreign residents who have contributed to the Vietnamese pcop.r 's rcsictancc to U.S. aggrescion for national saivaticn. Ai! foreign residents iv uy; in Louth vietnar. must respect the independence and sovereignty of Vietnam and obey -taw of the natior.ai democratic administration. To protect the legitimate rights a intcreate of al! foreign residents ..ho do not cooperate with the t'.S, iraperiaiists and their henchrneh in opposing the vietnamese peopie and who do not harm the independence and sovereignty of Vietnam. To give adequate conSideration to the richts and interests of those foreign residents who have dircctiy or indirectly supported thc Vietnamese peopie's resistance to U.S. aggression for nations! salvation. 232 .     . ; 1 5 September iRu? V .1! VTEma To llt,o1utc1y oppose ard abolish aXl po' -.cme of the V S. in; i.-ria'- 1 itt ant 'Let'-bcnchnc ained at s-i'-ing dLscr'-x. bet.ceen tue Vletnanear pc eric a-.!. Clnene re.in South vieinf.T an exploiting, repressng, and forcing Chinese rrs.ren-c adc V.atnjLlese citizenship To punish the- dlebanl a-entS and secret agents ot the iupcrialir.ts and tra South Vietnam puppet adrJni.t ration. 1X1 To ReStore ienaat Relations Between North and South Vletnar.!. Frtceet To'.-.rd Peaceful! Reunification of the Patheriar.c Vietnam 1s one Ths Vietnamese people are one. Ho .Dree can divide our father! Reunification of the country is the sacred aspiration of our entire people. Vie v. must be reunified Tne poiicy of the NFLSV consists of the following i--The reunification of Vietnam will be realkcc step by step and tbroueb pcccfiI meano on the .-rincipie of negotiation betveer. tire two coneu .rithout either Side usinc pressure against the other and without foreicn interference 2--Pending the . ification of thc country, the peopie in both r.onec -..'im nalce joint efforts tc oppose .'reirr invasion and defend the fatheriand and at thc same tire endeavor to c.tpanc economic and cuituca! er-chances. The peopie in both zones are free to e;chance setters, to 50 fron one rone to another, and to chooSe their piacc cf residence. IV. To Apply a Foreign Policy or Peace and Neutrality The IIFLSV applies a foreign pHcy of peace and neutrality, a foreign policy which guarantees the independence, sovereignty, unity, and territorial! intecrity of the country a a he J ?s safecuard '.orld peace. In more concrete terns tnis poiicy consists of the foUointnE points . 1--Tc establish diplomatic reiations with all countries rcgardiesS of their social and poiltica! system on the principle of mutual respect for each ethers independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, without infringement upon each other, without interference Into each other's interna! affairs, territory, equaiity, nutua! benefits, and peacefui coexistence To abolish al! unequal treatiec uhicb thc puppet acniniStration has r.icned vith the United States or any other country. Ta respect the eccr.onic and cultura! interests of those countries which Sympathir.e with, Sunport, or assist the stru1c acainst U.S aggrertSion for nationa! Salvation cf thc Victr.a-eSe poodle. To accept technics! and economic asSistance froti any country v.ithcu. cjmiclI corcitionS attached. To Join no military aUiance, to accept no military person d or nHi .ary tasea of foreicn countries on South VietnaLi territoej 2--To strencthen friendiy relations with ali countries which sympathize t it--., supparc, or assist the struypc against U.S, accression for national salvation of the Vietnamese peopie. To strengthen reiations of cooc ncishborilood t.-ith Cambodia and Laos. To unceaSingiy consoiidate sdidarity and mutual asSistance between the aeonies of the Indochinese countries with a view to defending their respective independence, sovereignty, and territoriai integrity against the agcressive and carprovocation polioy of thc U.S, inperiaiists and their hcnchnen. 233      y September lie? SOUTH VlETm.N  ;--Activelv support the nationai iibcratior- movement of the peopies in Asia, Africa, and Lat in nerica againSt impeiualism and oid ar d Tti. ccioniaiicr.l Actively support, trm Strugste of the American people aau st the U.3. i-periaiists' War of aguresSion m Viecnan. Actively support tie s.rusgte feu peace, duocracy. ard socia! progress in a.L. countries in the worid. 1ctiveiy struggle to contribute to the sateccardj. of world peace, oppose the Delticose and acgvessivo inperxa.i. Lsts headed by'J.S. imperial ism Demand toe dissolution of the aggress, tee military boos and foreign nititary bases of imperialiv Unceasingly consolidate and develop re.ati5 with international denccratic errant7.atJons and tae peoples of an countries inducing the American oeople Actively . V contribute to tne consol ldation and deve!epnenx of w worlc petptc s frant ii' Support oi Vietnam against the U.S. imperialist anSessurs, foe naticr.' w GFpenieree and peace The struggle against t! S ascension, for national salvation of our peopie is an jlTesely hard but glorious cause It concerns only the destiny of our peopie at present and all on- future generations Ju aiso the interests of the peoples in the world who are Struthtxhg for peace, nations! independence, democracy, and soclat progress Tn order to accomplish tnat gloriovS cause, our peopte, already united, nnst umte stiD more closely and broadly The IIFLSV warTJy welcomes at, poiit.lca.' part res, maas organizations, and patriotic and peosressive persona!itins who broadly vaHy witbin arid outside tne front in order to defeat together the U.S aggresSOl'S and tlnir hcuchmen Tie struggie against 0 3. aggro",ion, for national saivation of our people is ? Just cause Our people throu-houc the country are of one- mind to fight anc. defeat the U.S. assessors and their henchmen The sympathy. Support, and assistance of the people of the sOc.alist countries, tile sjan, African, and 1 atin Anerican countrirs and peace-Joving, justice-!ovinp peopie al. lver'tbe world, me'- iny the progressive rmople in tp.e United States, are becoming deeper and stronger day uy day '.e are vt.tling and wiH surety win comptete victory. Ho matter how frenzied, brutat, obdurate, and perfidious the b.S. imperlaiists nay be, they wiH inevitabiy meet with bitter failure In their criLinal schemes In the supreme interests of the fattier!and, Jet our entire peopie tn South Vietnan strengthen t..eir sotidarity, miHions as one, and rush forward Shoulder tu shothder in tile inpetus or our victories to conpietety defeat, the 11 3. aggressorS and tl.ei-stooge acin ini Strati on, and together with our northern conpatrlotb to fuirnj tc.e great and furious cause of liberating the couth, deiendlng the north, and proceeuirg toward the peacefu! reunification or the ratheriana. The 1TEL3V pledger, to be aiwayS worthy of the confidence of our conpatrlots and our friendS or. the five continents The Vietnamese peopie wil surety be victorious -he U 3. atjrcssors and their hencbnen win certainly be defeated; The NFLSV procrar. for iiberation is sure to natenaiize' Figntcrs and compatriots throughout south Vietnan, under te giorious banner of tbe immiV, march forward heroicalty?      4. ADDENDA (UNCLASSIFIED) INDEX Subject Page Hanoi Attitude on Bombing, 10 September 1967 236 Chronology of Viet Peace Efforts December 1966-February 1967 237 The Ashmore Letter to Ho Chi Minh1967 238 Publication of Ashmore Peace Feeler Attempts New York Times... 239 washington Post. 241 Comparison of Ashmore-LBJ Letters (by New York Times)... 244 State Department Denial of Ashmore Charges (NY Times Account).. 245 Text of State Department Comment on Ashmore Episode 246 State Department Press Conference Held by william P. Bundy on Ashmore Episode 247 235 .     Sept. m, 1967 THE VASHINGTON POST . H3 TFT ' 0 PtW Hanoi btmeBs I  It A Attitade in Bomb Sto<m By Murrey Marder Vrashinjton Post Staff Writer Nprth Yietnam is growing more unyielding about peace talks, rather than more flexible, as American bombings in-tensity, according to diplomatic rcports reaching Washington. This rising mood of militancy in Hanoi was one reason > why Secretary of State Dean Rusk on Friday deliberately downgraded prospects for negotiations. All accounts coming out of Hanoi, through public and private channels, show that the officially disseminated view cf 1 the war from there is precisely 1hc reverse of the official version in Washington. North vietnam contends, and what is more, perhaps be-lieves, that time and strategy-are on its side for outlasting the United States. Premier Is Quoted In an interview in Hanoi last week with North viet-namesc . Premier Pham van Dong by American newsman David Schoenbrun, the Premier was quoted as saying As for peace talks . the-initiative is up to tIie United States. You have to stop bomb ' ing us unconditionally. If you want peace taIks, they can lot low butthere will bo no ( reciprocity. There will be u j ' ,. bargaining. There will be no  blackmail, and we wilI not pay ransom to pirates. As for tile subject of talks, according to other rcports relayed to Washington, Hanoi maintains there is essentially only one real topic Withdrawal of United States forces from Vietnam. Schoenbrun, who was in North vielnam for nine days, related bis experiences in Bangkok on Thursday. They were broadcast last night (ABC Television's Scope, to be rebroadcast here at 1 p.m. today on Channel 7;. .1 Pham van Dong was described as planning for an Ar.vrican invasion and expecting the aerial devastation of Hanoi. Prepared tc Tight On He believes,' said Schocn-brun, that in a last act cf des-Iteration we arc going to wipe out Hanoi. ... He is prepared to fight on in thc mountains  for as long as it can possibly take. The Premier was reported reluctant even to talk about the possibility of peace discussions. He is, I think," said Schoenbrun, totally a hawk. Despite the heavy American bombing of North Yietnam Schoenburn, like other visitors, said he couId dctect "no evidence of fatigue among thc pcople but only resiliency strengthened, not weakened, by the escalating air war. Pham van Dong was quoted as saying We have onc overriding problem only, and that is how to exist and how to survive, and our whole country is geared to this. You Americans have other problcms. You have racial problems. You have world  commltmcnts. Vietnam is only I One of your problems. Maybe (you have got a millionmaybe you have got 2 millionAmericans who arc devoting themselves seriously, full time to the Vietnamese war. 1Ve have, 16 million. So we outnumber you S to 1. kike a Time Bomb ' In focusing on thc racial rioting in American cities as a major plus in North vietnams favor, Dong in an Aug. 31-speech said This struggle is like a time bomb at the heart of the U.S. capitalist society. Dong was reported by Schoenbrun to have scoffed at the Sept. 3 presidential election in South Vietnam in tbe I same vein as have North Viet-. nams public statements scorning it as low comedy." But American analysts believe thc election seriously discomfited Hanoi. They note that the program of the National Liberation Front, the political arm of the Vietcong guerrillas in South vietnam, has bccn revised to pledge a rcaUy democratic cicction. At the Texas' White House yesterday, press . secretary George Christian said the President is aware of reports that South vietnam has advised Great Britain that it mcans to approach North vicl-nam soon with an offer of direct peace talks that would include thc NLF-Vietcong. Secretary Rusk on Friday Said the United Stales WOuld welcome seme basis on which there could be a general re-thcre could be a general reconciliation among the pcople ble basis. But be said "that doesnt mean that the NLF has a status as a government . or that it should be given a veto on the possibility of pulling North Yietnam and South vietnam apart militarily. A leading House Renubli-can, Melvin R. Laird (RAVis.), said in Chicago on Thursday-night that Its increasingly evident that the Administration is pressing Saigon to negotiate directly with tbe Vietcong." Laird said they (the NLF) have the pcwer in South 3 ietnam at the present time and must take part in negotiations. i 236 ' "' .     far the Baggs met at thc Stateo Department with Undersecretary NichOlas deB. Katzen-bach and other top officials but r.Ot including Secretary Dean Rusk. A lettcr from Ho was drafted ant Secretary Ashmore tO with AssistWilliam P. Ey Chalmers M. Roberts washin.toa PoslStatr Writer The record indicates that the Ashmore-Baggs peace effort ran afoul of a change in American policy which occurred at the moment they were involved in vietnam di- plomacy. This is the record, as as it is now known, of pertinent events DEC. 4, !9G6Poland ported to the United States that North vietnam was prepared to send a man to Warsaw to meet an American representative and to de SO without demanding as a precondition an end to thc American bombing o the NorthAmerican officials subsequently contcndcd that independent checks showed this to be a Polish view, ' not that of North Vietnam. Dcc. 13-HAmerican planes raid near Hanoi. Poland later privately blamed the raids for ending chances or a meeting. After thc aids Hanoi began to stress the demand that bombing must cease unconditionally before thcrc could be talks. Dec. 26-Jan. 6, mtiHarrison Salisbury of tbe New York Times created a furor with dispatches from Hanoi picturing civilian destruction from tbe American raids. Officials here said Hanoi had let Salisbury in as part of a campaign to force an end to the bombing. Ashmore and Baggs ar- rived in Hanoi the Salisbury left. Jan. !2 Ashmore day and Baggs met Ho Chi Minh who stressed an end to the bombing Ashmore now writes that we had not brought back from this interview any hard proposal from Ho beyond the reiteration cf his unqualified commit- ment to enter into negotiations if the U.S. halted the bombing. Ashmore reported to State Department officials that he and Baggs felt that Ho seemed prepared to consider a specific proposal based on a formula of mutual deescalation" of the fighting. E-arly January to early February The United States secretly sent four memoranda to Hanoi describing, officials say, possible methods of deescalation. ' These messages, yet to be made public were handed by an American embassy official in Moscow to a North Vietnamese representative. Jan. 27 Hanois man in Moscow gave a reply to thc American official. Later the State Departmnt described the reply as a diatribe against the United States." Jan. 28North Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Duy Trinh in an interview' with Australian Communist journalist Wilfred Burchett said that it is only after tbe unconditional cessation of U.S. bombing and all other acts of war against the DRV (North vietnam) that there could be talks between the DRY and the U.S. Feb. 2President Johnson prepared a.letter to Ho In which he took up ths Burchett interview points. Mr. Johnson said he would order a cessation of bombing and also halt further aug-mcntation of U.S. forces in South,Vietnam as soon as I am assured that infiltration into South vietnam by land and sea has stopped. These acts of restraint, he said, would make possible serious private discussions. This letter, however, was not turned over to Hanois man in MOSCOW until Feb. 8 end thc delay bas never been plained. ex- Bundy, whose area includes Vietnam, as the chief departmental draftsman. The key sentence in the lettcr stated that senior officials" at State expressed opinion that sonic reciprocal restraint" w a s necessary along with a halt to the bombing and an end to thc influx of American troops if talks were to take place. Feb. 5 The draft letter was delivered to Ashmore at Fulbrights house. Ashmore mailed it that afternoon. The Icttcr did not specify the "reciprocal restraint although thc Presidents letter of three days earlier had Specified an end to North vietnamese infiltration into the South. In addition, on the day (Feb.. 2) the Administration said the Presidential letter was drafted, Mr. Johnson told a press conference that just almost any step would be a suitable response from Hanoi. He also had said that we would be glad to explore any reciprocal action. Sometime between Feb. 2 and 9 the official American terms were hardened. Feb. 8 Soviet Premier. Alexei Kosygin, who- was in London Feb. 613, said at a press conference that the Trinh interview with Burchett boils down" to saying that if the U.S. unconditionally stepped thc bombing, then it would be possible to open talks. Kosygin thus publicly changed Trinhs crucial word could  intO would. He was never contradicted by Hanoi on. this. Furthermore, Kosygin paSscd the word to washington, which had inquired as to when talks would begin, that they could start in three or four weeks. Feb. 9 Secretary Rusk, at a press conference which had bccn announced by the 3Vhite House, said that "for ' some time now there has been evident a systematic campaign by the Commu- mst side to bring about an unconditional and permanent cessation of the bombing of North vietnam withcut any corresponding military action on their side, in exchange for the possibility of talks talks which are thus far formless and without content. Rusk also distinguished between a pause in the bombing (hcre he seemed to indicate he would agree to a pause in exchange for talks) and a permanent cessation. Fer the latter to take, place, he said, "we must know the military conse- quences. The U.S., he said, cannot stop the bombing without reciprocity for that would be closing off one-half of the war while the rest of it goes on full force." In short. Rusk was surfacing tbe central point of the Presidents letter to Iio, thc contents of which vere not made public until Hanoi broadcast it March 21. Feb. !0 Ho said he received thc Johnson lettcr on this day. Ashmore assumes it arrived before his own letter with the less specific request on the point of reciprocity. During this period, Feb.-844, there was a pause in the bombing over the Tet holiday in vietnam, including a Presidentially ordered short extension. Feb. !3Ho in a letter tO Pepe Paul VI assailed the U.S. lie coupled an uncon-, ditional end to the bombing with the withdrawal of American forces and the recognition of thc National Liberation Front, the political arm of the vietcong. In Washington this was taken as a reply to the President. Resumption of the bombing was ordered. Feb. !5Ho replied to the President in words similar to thc Pope. A little later, writes Ashmore, he and Baggs received a reply tO the Ashrnore letter saying there did not seem to be any point to their making a second visit to Hanoi    (vK.vtrtS VIftslhtteian M'.v,. It tepy iqth Aslimor.es  Letter to Hanoi Chief Following is the text of the lettcr by Harry S. Ashmore to President Ho Chi Minh Dear Mr. President Mr. William Baggs and I have made a full report to appropriate officials of tbe United States Government on our recent conversation with you in Hanoi. Ambassador Luis Quintanilla has communicated bis views to Ihe U.S. Ambassador in Mexico City. The State Department has expressed itself as most grateful for your thoughtful approach to the possibility of an ultimate settlement of the hostilities between the United States'and thc Democratic Republic of Yietnam. In our several discussions with senior officials of the (State Departmcnt they took occasion to reiterate points we believe are already known to you. They emphasized that the U.S. remains prepared for .secret discussions at any time, without conditions, and that such di'cussions mijht cover the whole range of topics reIc-vant to a peaceful settlement. They reiterated that thc Geneva Accords might be the framework for a peaceful solution. They expressed particular interest in your suggestion to us that private talks could begin provided the U.S. stopped bombing your country, and ceased introducing additional U.S. troops into vietnam. They expressed the opinion that some reciprocal restraint to Indicate that neither side intended to use the occasion of ihe talks for military advantage would provide tangible evidence of the good faith of all parties in thc prospects tor a negotiated settlement. In the light of these concerns, thcy expressed great Interest in any elarifiCation of this point that you might wish to provide through a communication to us. Speaking now wholly for ourselves, we believe the essential condition for productive talks is an arrangement under which neither side stands to gain military advantage during thc period of negotiation. To achieve this end it .may be that preliminary secret discussions would be helpful to determine the cut-- line of a possible peaccful settlement. As we sec it, these are practical considcrations that have nothing to do with questions of "face. There is no doubt in our minds that thc American Government genuinely seeks peace. As private citi-zens, our sOle concern is in facilitating a discussion that will bring all matters at issue to official consideration. It is in this sense that we convey these comments, and invite any reply you may wish to make, which- of course we would report to our GOvern-ment in complete discretion. May I take this occasion to renew our thanks for the courteous and considerate treatment we received in Hanoi throughout our visit and for the honor of our most useful conversation with youIf you feet that further personal conversation with Mr. Baggs and me is in order we would, of course, return to Hanoi at your convcnicnce. HARRY S. ASHMORE j 238 .     I J ' Ashmore, Editor, Who Met With Ho Chi Minh, Says Efforts Were Undercut TWO LETTERS AT ISSUE One From the White House < Said to Have Conflicted With Intermediarys Ey HEDRICK SMITHSpecial l The New York Times WASHINGTON, Sept. 17Thc editor and writer. Harry S. Ashmore, reported-today that hcre-layed a peace bid to Ho Chi Minh on bcbaIf of the State De- partment last February. But Mr. Ashmore charged that President Johnson then "effectively and mtally canceled the secret aitiativc by sending an vncom-promising letter to the North Vietnamese President. Mr. Ashmore said bis lettcr had been written in response to a conciliatory conversation he had had with Ho Chi Minh in Hanoi last January. He added that Mr. Johnsons letter, setting forth most stringent" American terms for peace, reached Hanoi before the message that Mr. Ashmore bad been authorized to send.Duplicity Charged Ho Chi Minh, in a letter to ,Mr. Johnson dated Feb. 15 which became public last Marell 21rejected Mr. Jobn- -sons demands.As a consequence, Mr. Ashmore has indi- cated, thc secret State Department message routinely re-ceived a . negative response from Hanoi. .' Mr. Ashmore, former execu-itive editor of The Arkansas Gazette, is now executive vice esident of the Center for the .Mtudy of Democratic Institutions at Santa Barbara, Calif-He said President Johnsons let-iter had contradicted the terms jof the message approved by the State Department. Mr.'Ash-more also accused the President of crude duplicity" and thc Administration of 'double dealing. M william P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affiars, said the State Dc-partment "had discussions with .Mr. Ashmore and Mr. Baggs,  as we would with any Ameri- , can who has talked with lead- ers in Hanoi." But he refused to comment on Mr. Ashmores reported peace approach or his charge that the Presidents intervention bad upset the effort.Intensive Efforts r.ecalIed Any comment must await a careful study of Mr. Ashmores story, Mr. Bundy said. I cannot comment on something like this over the phone. ' Other officials, without confirming the report, recalled that last winter was a time of complicated contacts with Hanoi. The State Department has pre-viousIy disclosed that the United States Embassy in Moscow made five contacts with . North Vietnamese diplomats in ; January, culminating with the delivery of President Johnson's letter. " Early in February, the United States was also communicating with Hanoi through Prime Minister Wilson of Britain and Premier Aleksei N. Kosygin of the Soviet Union, who were meeting in London. Mr. Ashmore told of ths  peace approach in a 15,000- word article, "The Public Relations of Peace, printed in Center Magazine, a new bimonthly publication of his organization. , The peace approach, he re; ported, was an outgrowth of a trip he took to Hanoi last Jan-vary with William O. Baggs, ; edi tor of The Miami News. They ; arrived in Hanoi Jan. 6, had a private two-hour conversation with Ho Chi Minh Jan. 12, left Hanoi on Jan. 14 and reported to the State Department on Jan. 18. In a telephone interview today, Mr. Ashmore said he had . refrained from disclosing the ; episode until now because we thought that as long as we  A ... ... 4 . 239 might be a useful channel we didn't want to jeopardize it. But lie said the latest expansion of thc war indicated that whatever kind of channel we had is no use now and that there was no longer any point in keeping secret the unsuci cessful maneuvering o' last ' winter. ' Mr. Ashmore said that dur' ing ths contacts with North vietnamese leaders he and Mr. Baggs found Ho Chi Minh and ' other senior officers "deliver-i ately conciliatory." . Ho seemed prepared to consider a specific proposal based on a formula of mutual de-cs-calation," Mr. Ashmore added. 'Ho bad undsrstood that we . would report our conversation to the State Department and ' expected some response, since he had made arrangements to have any .further message sent directly to him." ., In the telsphonc Interview, Mr. Ashmore recalled that Ho Chi Minh had insisted on a bait in American bombing of North .vietnam as a requisite for peace talks. Ho Chi Minh also indicated that Hanoi would like to sec a halt in the steady build-up of American forces in South vietnam before talks began, Mr. Ashmore went on. In his article, Mr. Ashmore says he than drafted, in collaboration with Mr. Bundy, a carefully worded letter of a page and a half. It was sent to Hanoi Feb. 5 through a previously established channel in Cambodia. , Mr. Ashmore says the letter appeared to reduce American conditions for a halt in bomb- ing, asking for some move of ' "reciprocal restraint by Hanoi. In public statements, adminIstration officials were demand ing a reciprocal reduction" of ' the fighting by Hanoi. Kcy passages of the Ashmore letter, as reported in the article, were as follows Key Sections cf the lettcr, a? reported in the article, referred to the efforts of Mr. Ashmore . and Mr. Baggs as follows In our several discussions with senior officials of the state Department, they emphasized that the U.S. remains prepared for secret discussions at any time, without'conditions, and that such discussions might cover tbe whole range of topics relevant to a peaceful settlement. They reiterated that the Geneva, accords might be the framework for a peaceful solution.They expressed particular interest in your suggestion to us that private talks could begin provided that U.S. stoppcd bombing your country, and  ceased introducing additional U.S. troops into vietnam. They .     expressed the opinion that some 'T make this proposal to you reciprocal restraint, to indicate now wilI1 a specific sense of that neither side intended to urgenCy arising from thc itn-use the occasion of the talks, f  0 , ..for military advantage would P.!nen new, year holidays in .a . , VtisrnsTlt 1 r ora to. I make this proposal to you providc tangibc evidence of the good faith of all parties in the ' ArR.VRt .1,11 , J veil KUUUwJJ Ji! Vietnam. If you are ab!e to prospects for a negotiated settlement." . President Johnsons letter to Ho Chi Minh, dated Feb. 2, was relayed through the United States Embassy in Moscow to North vietnamese diplomats. President Chi Minh said he re- accept this proposal I sce no reason why it could not take effect at the end of ths new year, or Tet, holidays. The proposal T have made would be greatly strengthened if your military authorities and those of the Governmcnt of South Vietnam could promptly negotiate an extension of the Tet truce." Mr. Ashmores article coni-ments Villiam Budy and the others who labored over our draft letter bad insisted that it would be a mistake to tie any proposal to the Tet bombing pause, since this would ba interpreted by Ho as an effort to force his hand without adequate opportunity to consult with his own people and the National! Liberation Front, or Vietcong. j The bombing pause, part of Tet, began 7 A.M. Feb. S. It Feb. 12, but President Johnson extended it about 40 hours to avoid embarrassing Premier Kosygin, who had been in London over the Tet period trying to arrange peace talks. ceived President Johnsons let- ter on Feb. 10. Mr. Ashmore charged that the Presidential message contradicted the Ashmore-Baggs message in several important respects and thus nullified it. He noted that the Presidential letter did . not mention the Geneva accords as a basis for negotiation, aS the other message had. He also, noted that thc Prcsi-dent had offered to stop tbe bombing and the American troop build-up in South Viet-nam, but to do so only after receiving assurances that North Vietnamese infiltration into South vietnam had ceased. Mr. Ashmore referred to this passage from the Jolmson letter i am prepared to ordcr a cessation of bombing against your country and thc stopping of further augmentation of U.S. forces in South vietnam as soon as I am assured that in-filtration into South Yietnam by land and by sea has stopped. These acts of restraint on both sides would, I believe, make it possible for us to conduct serious arid private discussions leading toward an early peace. Mr. Ashmore maintained that the Presidential letter was timed to put a 'time squeeze on Hanoi, an aspect that had carefully been avoided in the drafting of the Ashmore-Baggs message. He referred to this excerpt 240 .     lltr'- V v  t n ui j ( i u Ashmore Says Feeler lO Hanoi Was Nullified By Murrey Marder Washinjton Post Staff Writer A prominent former newspaper editor charged yesterday that thc Johnson Administration joined in and then effectively and brutally cancelled a previously undiscIosed peace overture to Hanoi last February. The disclosure plus accusations of double-dealing and an almost total absence of candor" on the part of President Jchnsoli and the State Department were made by Harry S. Ashmore, executive vice president cd the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions at Santa Barbara, Calif. Ashmore visited Hanoi in January. He portrayed tbe President, and by implication, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, ras nullifying a secret con-'dilatory letter to Hanoi that her State Department offi- ->als joined Ashmore in drafting, by sending a presidential letter setting tougher terms for peace talks. The cOnditions for halting the American bombing of , North Vietnam to produce negotiations are still at the center of current national and international debate. White Housc Press Secretary Gcorge Christian said last night that he was unfamiliar with Ashmore's account or the letter he cited. Secretary Rusk said he had not talked with Ashmore or his associates and thus felt it inappropriate to get into the matter now, a spokesman said. Other officials had no immediate comment. Ashmore, formerly the Pulitzer Prizewinning editor of thc Arkansas Gazette of Little Roek, Ark., met. with North Vietnamese President Ho Chi Minh in Hanoi last Jan. !2. With Ashmore were william 'C. Baggs, editor of tbe Miami (Fla.) News and also a dircc- r of the Santa Barbara Cen-.er, and Luis Quintanilla, former Mexican Ambassador to the United States. Their meetings with North vietnamese leaders were described at the time only as an effort to solicit North Vietnam's attendance at au unofficial peace convocation sponsored by thc California-based Center at Geneva, last May. Ashmore, in a lengthy article written for his organization's Center Magazine, said, the trip was undertaken with secret recognition by the Ad-J ministration that it also might open up a useful channel of communication with the North vietnamese. Newsman Departs  At the State Department, he said, we were asked to keep the trip secret as long as possible . They entered Hanoi on Jan. 6, the day that Harrison Salisbury of The Nev.-York Times was departing on' the International Control Commission plane that carried them to North vietnam from Cambodia, and thc news of the AshmoreBaggsQuinanilla visit became known. They saw President Ho for about two hours on Jan. !2. By tbe time Ashmore and' Baggs returned to Los Angeles i on Jan. 15, Ashmore wrote, thc ' Salisbury articles about civilian casualties caused by bombing North Vietnam had "created a national furore, with a "concerted effort in Washington to discredit Mr. Salisbury . Ashmore said our reports were a complete vindication of Mr. Salisbury, but he and Baggs avoided any cOm-ment about thcir. attempts to open private communications with Hanoi. At the State Departments request, said Ashmore, he and Baggs managed to hide out for three days aftcr our return, and to meet secretly in Washington with the Department's top echelon. Departmental Briefings "The briefings (at State) went on intermittently -for a day and a half," said Ashmore, and covered the conversation with Ho in great detail. We had net brought back, any hard proposal from Ho' Chi Minh," Ashmore continued, beyond the reiteration of his unqualified commitment to enter into negotiations if the United States halted the bombing cf Nqrth Vietnam. This could not on its face be said to meet the stated American requirement of a recipro- > < t-j r ; cat gesture of reduced military action by Hanoi. "But Mr. Baggs and I, Ashmore said, could offer our judgment that the tone of the conversation had been deliberately conciliatory and that Ho sccmcd prepared to consider a specific proposal based on a formula of mutual de cscala-tion. Moreover, no real risk was entailed in finding out whether this was SO. Ho had understood that we would report our conversation to tbe State Department and had made arrangements to have any response sent directly to him. Schizoid Quality Ashmore and Baggs then left Washington. Ashmore said our dealings with the Depart-, ment had begun tO take on a' pronounced schizoid quality. Baggs, he said, had done some confidential diplomatic errands for thc late President Kennedy in the Caribbean, and was on fairly intimate terms with a good many top State Department officials. Ashmore described himself as encumbered by identification with the eclipsed Adlai Stevenson wing of thc Democratic Party and by a long pcr-sonal association with the JOhnson Administration's leading betc noire, (Sen.) J. William Fulbright. Added Ashmore, Finally, we represented the Center, an unconventional, and therefore automatically suspect, institution. Ashmore wrote that we soon began to feel that we were confronted by two dis-' tinct State Departments. One, which obviously-regarded us with profound distrust, apparently was headed by Secretary Rusk," said Ashmore, who never saw us or otherwise aCknowtedged our presence. "Thc other (State) Department," said Ashmore, "which appeared to be seriously interested in negotiations with Hanoi, included Under Secretary Nicholas deB. Kat-zcnbach, Averell Harriman, the elder statesman who speaks with the authority of a personal representative of thc President, and Assistant Secretary william Bundy, who is immediately in charge of I Southeast Asian Affairs. 241 .     IniitatiOns Rejected  At thc State Department's request, said Ashmore, he and Baggs rejected invitations to hn-'tify betcre either Senate or tc committees, and tO stay -m of thc news as much as possible during the next few weeks, while our report presumably bounced back and forth between the two (Stale) Departments. Finally, be said, Sen. Fulbright expressed surprise when he a$ked Baggs if they, bad reported their conversation with Ho to President Johnson personally, and was told no. Fulbright raised that with thc President at a White House function, said Ashmore, i"and thereby pinked thc nerve i that activates the President's consensus reflex." Ashmore related that the President said he thought it unwise tO see Ashmore and Baggs personally' and start speculation, but wanted Fulbright to he absolutely satisfied that we were being taken seriously and treated proper-ly." The President, Ashmore said, suggested that the Senator sit in at the next session, at the State Dcpartmcnt. "The Presidents interven- Ashmore cOntinucd, pro-, o ,ed a meeting with the Departments upper hierarchy, (minus Secretary Rusk), and Fulbright, plus a silent White House observer as witness. Ashmore said last night that 1interest in your suggestion to they met in Under Secretary us that private talks could Katzenbachs office on the J begin provided the U.S. stop-morning and ' afternoon ofj pej bombing your country, Feb. 4. The principals there,, anc( ceased introducing addi-he said, alsc included IVilliam tional U.S. troops into Viet- Bundy and Harriman. When Sen. Fulbright had finished outlining his views, Ashmore wrote, and the air- -, side intended to use thc occa-! had whisked sjon of the talks for military1 i    a r l-ov-t .-.a .1 .   conditioning h u  iaway the last traces of brim-stpne, the decision was taken to dispatch a reply to Ho Chi Minh... In it, Ash more, it was agreed that Baggs and he would express the Department's view that it might be possible to suspend tbe bOmbmg and initiate negotiations, without specific concessions beyond an agreement that neither side (Would use the occasion to improve its military position. "The letter also was to suggest that Mr. Baggs and I return to Hanoi for fur- options, without setting out any specific demand for wh-T ciS V te-med A that arrangements could be skin milATT n either marln tn nhaso us out if it actions. informal discussions, or made to phase us out if it were desired that tbe matter proceed directly to the official level. I Thc composition of a page-fand-a-half letter, tc be sent over Ashmore's signature, J 'consumed most of a Saturday afternoon, he Said. It was allowed to simmer overnight, was reconsidered without our presence at sn upper-echelon meeting on Sunday afternoon, said Ashmore, and'the final version was dclivercd in a plain manila envelope tO the residence of Sen. Fulbright, where Mr. Baggs and I had' gone for luncheon. I mailed it myself that afternoon, Feb. 5, said Ashmore, under the perhaps prophetic postmark of the John Koster Dulles International Airport. By prior arrangement, the letter was to be mailed to Cambodia by regular mail and forwarded from there to Hanoi. Ashmore said Tbe key passages in our letter (to Ho) read In our several discussions with senior officials of the Stale Department . they emphasized that the U.S. remains prepared for secret discussions at any time, without conditions, and that such discussions might cover thc whole range of topics relevant to a peaceful settlement. They reiterated that the Geneva Accords (of 1954 and 1962 on Southeast Asia) might be the framework for a peaceful solution. They expressed particular nam. They expressed the opinion that some reciprocal restraint to indicate that neither advantage would provide tangible evidence of the good faith of all parties in the prospects for a negotiated settlement ." ,The key phrase hcrc was .the call for reciprocal restraint, sources on the Asb-more-Baggs side of the issue stressed last night. These sources said it was emphasized in the discussions in the State Department that this tecmi-nology would leave open many Said Ashmore This conciliatory feeler was effectively and brutally cancelled before there was any chance to determine what re-sponsO Hanci might have made. Cessation for Holiday On Feb. 14, after a temporary cessaticn of the bombing for tbe Tet holiday (in Vietnam) and an Ostentatious two-day extension beyond thc originally announced termination, the aerial attack on North Vietnam was resumed and es-calateck But it was not until after-ward that Ashmore and Baggsj learned, apparently when thc, rest of the world did, that a presidential letter considerably different than the one they collaborated on, was written even before theirs was, on Feb. 2. Later (on March 21, W67) it was revealed in Hanoi, and confirmed in Washington, that the President, under date of Feb. 2, had already dispatched tan offsetting message," said Ashmore, to Ho Chi Minh iover his own signature. This was transmitted from' Moscow cn Feb. 8, thc day tbe bombing was suspcndcd and received in Hanoi on Feb. 10. It was certainly in Ito's hands when ours arrived. That letter from the President, Ashmore contended, "set forth ... the most stringent demands yet made for advance assurance that Hanci would halt infiltration of troops to tbe South. Thc unCompromis-ing tone of the presidential message tbOroughly disposed of the careful tempering we 242 .     had undertaken In those long (said Ashmore, ". the dis-fly-specking sessions in thc; ciaimers consisted Ol no more than assurance that those ne ' was addressing, at least, were sincerely seeking a settle-i mentState Department. The key language in thc President's message was I am prepared to order a cessation of bombing against your country and the stopping ol .further augmentation of United States forces in South Vietnam as soon as I am 'assured that infiltration into South Yietnam by land and sea has stopped.. Extending Truce Presidcnt Johnson also told . Ho that the proposal would be greatly strengthened if your military authorities and those of thc Government of South vietnam could promptly negotiate an extension of the Tet (lunar New Year holiday) truce, then under way. Hanoi, however, always had adamantly refused any negotiations with thc regime in Saigon. Ashmore said that William Bundy and the others who labored over our draft letter had insisted that It would be a mistake to tic any proposal to the Tet bombing pause, since this would be interpreted by Iio as an effort to force his hand without adequate opportunity to COnsult with his own people and the NLF (National Liberation Front, thc political arm of the Yietcong guerrillas in South Vietnam.) Under date of Feb. H, Ashmore charged, Mr. Johnson got from Ho Chi Minh tbe sharp, ncgatlve reply he must have expected. Ours came a little later-said Ashmore, the simple, unexceptionable statement that there did not seem to be any point in Mcssrs. Ashmore and Baggs coming back to Hanoi at that time. Necessarily Subjective Ashmore said he could only offer a necessarily subjee-tive account of what actually went on in thc upper reaches of the Administrations to account for tbe diverse let-' ters. From beginning to end cf our dealings with thc Depart ment, he charged, there was ' Ashmore said the credibil-! ity gap .may be less a case of deliberate dissembling than of pervasive ignorance of ultimate policy that goes right to the top of the Cabinet." He said A President who insists on keeping his options open as long as possible, and personally revealing his choices, leaves even his own most ex-IaIted associates embarrassingly mute inregard to large af-1 fairs for which they are nom-' inally responsible. Charges Double-Dealing Ashmore said that the President has taken a ping-pong approach" to Vietnam to try to get out of Southcast Asia without appearing to have suffered a major military and political defeat. He said the double-dealing to which Wit-' liarn Baggs and I were subjected reflects alternate presidential responses to military pressure and the unpopularity of thc war. Thc Administration, Ashmore charged, set out "to discredit" the unofficial confcr-ence on peace held in Geneva in May entitled Pacem in Terris IL The intensified American bombing of the Hanoi-Haiphong area in April, he said, led to North Vietnam's refusal to attend the conference, undermining tlic concept of the original conference objective. Ashmore said thc State Department sent a young diplomat, Frank Sieverts, to Geneva in line with its successful effort to implant in the American media tbe notion that the Convocation was deliberately and suspiciously loaded against thc United States.. Presidcnt Johnson, In his dealings with the American intellectual community," Ashmore charged, made the tactical error of confusing his critics with bis enemies." Ash-mcre said that preaching consensus, the President had madc it impossible of attainment by constant resort to thc kind Of crude duplicity that buys time but destroys confidence. What the Administraticn desperately needs," said Ash- an almost total absence of candor on the official side." . We never got a satisfactory answer, he said, whether thc Administration was really willing to negotiate a compromise settlement in Vietnam or was committed to more, is the support of men a miIitary victory of intellectual capacity and 3Vhen Fulbright, at one of moral passion, but these are the State Department meet-!Qualities primarily associated ings, bluntly stated his viewjwith those Lyndnn Johnson that thc latter was thc case,'"no loncjc. tolerates."  13506 Section 1 t   By NWD Date 201 Johnson and Ashmore Letters to Hanoi Comvared Following  . ' I .vwHui- is a comparison of-b,e evidence of tbe gond faith greatly strengthened if your highlights of a letter by Presi-ai! Parti?s in tbe prospectSmjtary authorities and thosa dent Johnson to President HoII PeSbtmted settlernent. of the Governent of South Viet-Chi Minh of North vietnam.'. PRESIDENT JOHNSON There promptly negotiate sent Feb. S, and a letter by0.one '74 t0 overvnaTC Harry S. Ashmore, the editor,Ithis Problem of commumca- an cxFns.on of the Tet truce.- tion and to move forward in sent Feb. 5. Presidcnt Johnson wrote I am prepared to order a cessation of bombing against your country' and the stopping . of further augmentation of United States forccs in South Vietnam as Soon as I am assured that infiltration in South vietnam by land and by sea has stopped. "These acts of restraint on wth sides would, I beIievc, Dake it possible for us to con-iuct serious and private discus-nons leading toward an carIy >eace. MR. ASHMORE wrote They high officials of tbe State De-lartment expressed particular nterest in your suggestion to js that private talks could be-jin provided tbe United States Stopped bombing your country and ceased introducing addi- ; tionat United States troops into i Vietnam. They expressed the ' opinion that some reciprocal re- straint to indicate that neither i side intended to use thc occa- i Sion of the talks for military' advantage would provide tangi- i search for a peaceful settle-t ment. That is for us to arrange ; for direct talks between trusted ; representatives in a secure set-' ting and away from ths glare . of publicity. Such talks should not bs used as a propaganda exercise, but should be a serious effort to find a workable and mutually acceptabIe solu-tion. MR. ASHMORE They State Department officials emplia-sizcd that the United States remains prepared for secret discussions at any time, without conditions, and that such discussions might cover the whole . range of topics relative to a peaceful settlement. PRESIDENT JOHNSON I make this nroposaI to you now with a specific scnse of ur-gency arising from the immi-nent new year holidays in vietnam. If you are able "to ac-cept this proposal I see no reason why it could not .take effect at the end of tbe new year, or Tet, holidays. The pro-posal I have made would be MR. ASHMORE relate a sible agreement to the years truce in vietnam. pos-new MR. ASHMORE TIiey the State Departmcnt officials re-iterated that ths Geneva accords might be the framework for a peaceful solution. PRESIDENT JOHNSON did not mention thc Geneva gree-nients of 1954 as a possible framework. PRESIDENT JOHNSON "As to the site of thc biIateral discussions I propose, there arc several possibiIitics. We could, for example, have our repre-sentatives meet in Moscow where contacts have already  occurred. They could meet in some other country Such as 1 Burma. You may have other arrangements or sites in mind, and I would try to meet yc suggestions. MR. ASHMOREs letter pro-posed no specific meeting place. PRESIDENT JOHNSON If you have any thoughts about the actions I propose, it would be most important that I receive them as soon as possible." MR. ASHMORE "In the light of thcse concerns, they the State Department officials ex-pressed great interest in any 1 clarification of this polrt about mutual restraints that you might wish to provide through a communication to us. > 244 .     !n addition, taking direct issue with Mr. Ashmore, Mr. Bundy' said there was  'no in- n 1 Rejects Ashmore Contention That White House Lettcr Io Hanoi Stiffened Terms consistency between the Gov- ernment-drafted message sent; The Governments chagrin to Hanoi on Feb. 5 through Mr. T cr dic discIosure of the Ash-Ashmore and a letter that .  ., , , , ,, evident both in Mr. Bundy s President Jounson sent to ho . connnents and jn a statement Chi Minh through the Moscow ; issued by the State Depart-cbanncl on Feb. 8. Mr. Ashmore ment. The statement ended had contended that the Presi- with the observation that the dents letter contradicted the I!SCl.iure,1' 'VI'L not reassure thus -0X' J-OS S Lively and brutaliy canceled secret. his effortsMr. Bundy also spoke of un-, KT. --- ------- . , . , v.ueurtv Ui ULI . Asnmore, rcached by . dertakings from Mr. Ashmore1 Orsrl --- .telephone late today, said thc and Mr, Eaggs that they "would i Text of the Stole Department statement is on Page 24. By HEDRICK SMITH Special to The Net? York Times WASHINGTON, Sept. IS The Administration today dc-nied charges that President Johnson had effectively and brutally sabotaged a peace approach to Hanoi tbroush pri-vate channels. Tbe State Department went to eIaborate lengths to reply to the charge by- the editor and writer Harry S. Asbmore. Mr. Ashmore wrote yesterday that he acted as a Governmant-ap-oroved intermediary last Feb- Governments argument doesnt add up very well." . My view is that the two let-(tcrs are inconsistent in tone and content, he added. "Any-.one can figure it out theyre both available, now. The tone of ours is quite conciliatory. The tone of the President's is quite harshThe President's letter to Hanoi was published in Thc New York Times last March 22 and Mr. Ashmore's today. If the Moscow contacts were so vital, Mr. Ashmore asked, why did they send our letter? They were under no com-pulson, he added. "They couId ihave said to us Thank you .vary only to be undercut by . the President, who hardened ever back'iu-en'AyUre ever oacjc jn Hanoi, send us a American terms. The controversy has arisen out of a trip to Hanoi last Jan. C to 14 by Mr. Asbmore and William C. Baggs, editor Jof Thc Miami News. They j-psstcard. That would have closed the matter. Mr. Bundy, who was one of Mr. Ashmores principal Government contacts last winter, dismissed as nonsense'Mr. Ashmores assertion that bis role brought back reports of a con- . had been undermined by conciliatory conversation with flicts between two State Dc-President Ho Chi Minh and partments one sympathetic were later given a State De- to conciliatory efforts and the partment message to send to Other.taking a hard line toward 1 -Hanoi. anoh r Ashmore understandably Bundy Gives Account -"felt his own channe! was St William P. Bundy, Assistant 1he stage- Mr. nnau. M w ,,Bundy said. It was not." Secretary of State for Far East- Bundy said the Adminis-ern Affairs, confirmed today nation had been concentrating that the Ashmore peace effort on its exchanges in Moscow,! had taken place, but he said at which North vietnam disclosed a crowded news conference last March 21. He said he was. that Mr. Ashmores version of astounded that Mr the events was misleading Ashmorc-> h,s. Pushed ac- The burden of his argument was that the Ashmore effortscount of last winters maneu-venng, had failed to consider thc impact of the Moscow con- had been subsidiary to a far tacts, more active, important and di-( rect official contact with Not Stringing Aleng In an hour-long news briefing, unusualiy detailed for a North vietnamese represents- . ves In Moscow in January subject so delicate as peace ap-'proachcs, Mr. Bundy said Mr. (md early February. , Ashmore and Mr. Ra.gs had not at the time been told of ,!the Moscow efforts. It would = have been "very unwise" tO disclose thcin to private citi-Rzens, Mr. Bundy added. But when a reporter aSkcd if the Administration bad been stringing along" the two men, Mr. Bundy replied. Absolutely not. not publish" details of their tion, effort. 1"J' thc North Vietnamese Header was "deliberately con-Iciliatory" and sectncd pre- Mr. Ashmore disclosed the . -W In . proposal based on a formula of word article in Center Maga-ziiiC, a new bimonthly publication cf the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions in Santa Barbara, Calif. Mr. Ash-more is executive vice president of the center and Mr. Baggs one of its directors. In bis article, Mr. Ashmore said they went to Hanoi to arrange for North Vietnamese participation in the convoca-tion Pacem in Terris II, a world forum on peace. It was being j arranged by the center to open in May in Geneva. Mr. Ashmore wrote that oir Jan. 12, h and Mr. Baggs met President Ho Chi Minh and that, in a two-hour convcrsa- mutual de-escalation of the fighting. The State Department, while conceding that the two men had reported a conciliatory tone in their Hanoi conversations, asserted that thcir re-ports, dictated to the Govern-ment on Jan. IS, did noL indicate any give in Hanois terms. In this conversation, Ho had insisted that there could be no talks between the U.S. and Hanoi unless thc bombing were stopped, and also unless the U. S. stopped all reinforcements during the period of the talks," thc State Department said. Contradicting tbe Asbmore! versionoi ute- cpioonc, tub Government statement went on to say, Ho was reported to be jadamant against any reciprocal military restraint by North vietnam. Mr. Bundy reported that at the time, Government officials Saw "nothing hopeful" in the Ashmore-Haggs efforts but felt that it should not be ncgtectcd. You have to go on prob-ing," he explained. On Feb. 4, Mr. Ashmore and Mr. Baggs were called to the State Department to mect with top officials including Mr. Bundy and Under secretary Nicholas deE. Katzen'oaeh, Senator J. W. Fulbright, chair-'man of the Foreign Relations Committee, was aiso present. 245 .    By NWD Date 201 I ! 1 ext o f State Department Comment on Peace Feeler Special to The New York Titncs 1 WASHINGTON, Sept. 18 'oliowing is the text of a stote-.tent issued by the State De-' partment today regarding a t report that President Johnson had undermined a peace ap- proach to North Vietnam c We have had a number of inquiries concerning news stories published today, based on an article by Mr. Harry Ashmore in a publication of tbe Center for the Study of Democratic Insti-tutions (C.S.D.I.). The facts concerning the departments contacts with Messrs. Ashmore and Baggs ingly, the position of thc United States Government on key issues relating to peace was discussed at some length, so that Baggs and Ashmore could represent it accurate-ly in Hanoi. 3 On Dec. 23. Baggs visited the department just prior to the departure uf the three-man group on Dec. 23. At that meeting, the basic un-dersta.nding of the United States Government position was reaffirmed, and it was further agreed that Baggs fore Hanoi in these Moscow contacts, without al any time produeing sponsc. Toward any useful re- 6 the end ary, Messrs. Baggs more returned to of Janu-and Ash- Washing-ton and expressed to the de- William C. Baggs, editor The Miami News are folIows Hl of as of  During ths summer V 106G, Mr. William Baggs toId ; tbe department that C.S.D.I. > was planning a major con-( ference in May of 1967 in Geneva, to follow up on the P first Pacem in Terris mect- ing held in New York in February of 1965. Mr. Baggs . disclosed to us efforts that the center was mailing to invite North Vietnam to at-tend, and the department re-sponded sympathetically to  thc idea of the conference and to these efforts. These initial contacts were with Mr. George Ball and Mr. Wil-; liam Bundy. The President ' and Secretary Rusk were in- formed, and Mr. Bali, was i directed to handle contactswith Mr. Baggs on bchaIf of t the United States Govern-r ment. and Ashmore would report confidentially what they were able to pick up in Hanoi. 4 Messrs. Baggs and Asbmore visited Hanoi from Jan. 6 to Jan. 14. They then returned to ths ILS. and on Jan. IS dictated for the de-partment a full and confidcn-ticular a conversation with President Ho on Jan. 12. In this conversation, Ho bad in-sisted that there could be no talks between the U.S. and Hanoi unless, the bomb-ing were stopped, and unless also the U.S. stopped ail re- inforcements during the pe-riod of the reported to talks. Ho was be adamant (2 'In mid-November and ) again in early December, Mr. Baggs was joined by Mr. ' Ashmore in calls at the de-partment. In these calls, the f progress of the conference plans vas reviewed, and the ' two visitors indicated that i they had a tentative invita-1 tion to go to Hanoi, with ' Mr. Luis Quintanilla of Mex-- ico. Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore also suggested that, if they were able to visit Hanoi, they might be able to conduct useful explorations of North vietnamese views wards peace. Mr. George Ball having then left tbe cc-partment, the primary re-. sponsibility for these conver-' sations passed to his successor, Mr. Katzenbacb, who kept the President and the secretary of state informed as a matter of course. In these conversations, de-- partment representatives act  ceptcd the Baggs-Ashmore suggestions and undertook to cooperate fully. Accord- against any reciprocal military restraint by North .Viet-nam. The record does not show that he solicited any U.S. Government response to these remarks. 5 Concurrently, prior to Jan. 18, on U.S. initiative and without any connection to the Baggs-AshmOre actions, U.S. Government representa-tives had established a direct channel for communication with North Vietnamese rep-resentatives in Moscow, with the apparent agreement of both sides, this channcl v;as being kept wholly confidential, and was therefore not revealed to Messrs. Bags, and Ashmore in their discussions at thc department. It is, of course, funda-mental to tbe U.S. Govern-' ment dealings with Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore that there existed at the time this direct and secret channel. Exchanges through this direct channel COntinued through January and early February and culminated in President Johnsons .letter to President Ho of Feb. 8 (mis-takenly stated by Mr. Ashmore as Feb. 2). As has been stated by representatives of the department, a wide vari-ety of proposals was put be- partment the strong hope that they could be given a message for transmission to Hanoi. The department de-cided tijat, while the direct channel in Moscow was cru-cial and must at all costs be prcserved, it would be useful to send a more general message through Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore, which would be consistent with the important messages being exchanged in Moscow. In view of inis channel (of which j Baggs-Ashmore were imat ware) there was some ques- tion as to the further utility ; of detailed informal communications. ' It seemed clear from the account given by Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore that their channel of communication had been established with the primary purpose of ex-changes concerning North vietnamcse attendance at tbe May conference. Neverthe-lOss, Baggs and Asnmore said they could send any messages for Hanoi through the regular mail to a North Vietnamese 'representative in Pnompenh, who in turn would relay it to a North vietnamese official who had been the principal contact of Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore in Hanoi, Accordingly, the letter now published by Mr. Ashmore worked out with the representatives of the de-partment, and authorized to be sent on Feb. 5. we were' subsequently informed by Mr. Ashmore that this letter reached Pnompenh on Feb 15. J 7j y No useful purpose could bs served by giving further de-tails on what took place in ths Moscow channel. We can say, however, that on Feb. "7, while that channel was (still opm and in operation, 'separate discussions were initiated in London bctwecn Prime Minister WiIson and Kosygin of the .Premier U.S.S.R. The combined reading of thc Moscow channel arid of these discussions led to the dispatch on Feb. S of President Johnsons letter to President Ho. This letter was of courSe published unilaterally by Hanoi on March 21, and ------------  is a matter of public record. It rested on, and was of course read by Hanoi in re-lation to, the various pro-posals. that bad been conveyed in the Moscow channel. There was no change of basic position whatever between Feb. 5 and Feb. S, but President Johnsons letter did in-cIude a specific action proposal that speaks for itself, as docs thc tone of his communication. 8 As already noted, Hanot had not responded in any useful way to the variety of suggestions conveyed in the Moscow channel.'Its sole and , apparently final response was reflected on Feb. 13, in a letter by President Ho to "Pope Paid VI. This letter, in the words of one press ac-count today, coupIecl an un-conditional end to the bombing with the withdrawal of Aihcrican forces and the rec-ognition of the National lib-cration Front. On Feb. 15, President Ho replied formally to the President in similar terms. At thc same time, Hanoi broke off the Moscow channel. PI Handls attitude remained negative throughout. The Baggs-Ashmore efforts wtre necessarily handled by the department with an eye to the direct and then-confiden-tial channel that existed concurrently to Hanoi. .The latter appeared to be by far the more reliable and secure method of ascertaining Hanoi's views. ; ftoj <> Finally, we note with regret that Mr. Ashmore is apparently ignorant of the sub- sequently published reports of the Moscow contacts, and of their confirmation by department representatives. We noted with still greater regret that at no time since has be consulted with the department in order to at-tempt to understand the in-tcrrelationship that necessar- ily obtained between the Moscow channel and his own efforts, As this case shows, the Administration has been prepared at all times to cooperate with private individuals who may be in contact with Hanoi in any way, and who are prepared to act responsibly and discreetly. This policy continues, al-though it seems clear that the present disclosure vvi'.lj not reassure Hanoi that such private contacts will be kep secret.N . . v, 246 .     8763 7- CALL 53337 FOR HHCCMC SERVICE 9 13 13 32 2. f --------------------------- ------------------------- t . W-s. ! 1NF0--J5-2 Nf<C-l SECDEF-7 ASDIS'A-9 DIA-15 CSA-l CNO-8 CSAF-1 CMC-3 CJCS-ISACSA-3 SAAC-3 ASDPA-1 ASDSA1 FILE1 (5 7) J J F KS  . L  UNCLASSIFIED J 1 PAGE 0i STATE 39365 84 ORIGIN P 04 INFO EA 19.GPM 03vSC RyRSC 0UUSIA ! 2 H ip.NSC -CjNSAE Stab Ei. 4 INR 07,P 04CIA 04DOD 01PSP 02,-SS SoSAL I 5, 10 2 jEUR 05 t SAH 03, ACDA i VyNlc 0U5i R DRAFTED SYt PVNCDNARZACIH APPROVED BYi Ps DAmIEL N ARZACa JRo P L8P33IZ SEP 67 FM SECSTaTE WASHDC TO aFEMBASsY SAIGON PRIORITY OSSS INFO AMEMdASSY SANGKOK PRIORITY 0000 AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE 0000 UNCLAS STATE 39365 FOLLOWING IS FULL TRANSCRIPT DEPARTMENT PRESS BRIEFING SEPTEMBER 181 (DISTRIBUTION OF STATEMENT SY THE DEPARTMENT GF STATE" DATED SEPTEMBER )8r> 1967 .  5 0 6 P 0 M . QUOTE FIR .MCCLOSKEY t IT APPEARS THAT nOS OF YQU 'NOW -HAVE BEEN ABLE TO GET THROUGH THE STATEMENT- FtlCH IS A DEPARTMENT OF STATE S ; ATtMENT0 AS ONE OF THE GENT ELMER CONCERNED IN '"HE CON VERSA! I On .n"-; MESSRS, BAGGS AND ASHMORE, RaLt.N 3UNDY 1S HERE TO AM' ' QUESTIONS THAT YOU MAY HAVE, AFTER i .VlNG READ THE ST, Ylo . 247 UNCLASSIFiED      UNCLASSIFIED PAGE 2 STATE 39365 Q. IS HE ON THE RECORD? MR. MCCLOSKEY ON THE RECORD. ASSISTANT SECRETARY WILLIAM BUNDY I WlLL BE ON THE RECORD IN RESPONDING TO YOUR QUESTIONS. IN THE SCOPE OF THIS DISCUSSION AND ALL 0F WHAT HAS SEEN SAID ABOUT MR. ASHMORE'S AND MR.BAGGS' CONTACTS WITH US AND S0 ON. I DO WANT TO SAY ONE THING, IF I MAY ON BACKGROUND. HAVING READ THE WH0LE OF THE ARTICLES THROUGH THE GENEROSITY OF ONE OF THE LOCAL NEWSPAPERS AND THAT IS WITH RESEPCT TO ALL THE WHOLE SWEEP OF HIS ALLEGATIONS CONCERNING THE MEETING IN GENEVA IN MAY. I DONT WANT TO COMMENT ON THOSE IN DETAlL. A GREAT DEAL COULD BE SAID. AND WE ARE DOING SOME WORK THAT MAY RESULT IN SOMETHING LATER. BUT LET ME JUST SAY ON BACKGROUND THAT ALL OF YOU ARE WELL AWARE. I AM SURE, WITH RESPECT TO ONE POINT IN THAT -- AMBASSADOR GOLDBERG WAS IN FACT, SCHEDULED TO APPEAR IN GENEVA AT THAT MEETING AS A SENIOR ADMINISTRATION SPOKESMAN. THE FACT THAT HE COULDN'T GET THERE AND THAT NO SENIOR MAN WAS AVAILABLE TO TAKE HIS PLACE WAS DUE ENTIRELY TO THE FACT THAT THE MIDDLE EAST CRISIS CAME IN THAT WEEK. AND I MERELY STATE THAT TO REMIND YOU OF WHAT TOOK PLACE, ON ONE PARTICULAR POINT ON WHICH HE IS CRITICAL OF US. WITH THAT BACKGROUND COMMENT, I AM OPEN FOR ON THE RECORD QUESTIONS QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS BY MR. BUNDY Q WILL YOU RESPOND DIRECTLY TO WHAT SEEM TO BE THE NEWS POINT OF THE ASHMORE MAGAZINE ARTICLE THAT THE PRESIDENT'S LETTER IN FEBRUARY, I THINK THE QUOTE WAS "EFFECTIVELY AND CANCELED THIS WHOLE EFFORT TO DRAW HO INTO A PEACE ARRANGEMENT." A WELL, LET ME SAY AT THE OUTSET, AS IS OBVIOUS FROM THE ACCOUNT BEFORE YOU, THAT THE PRINCIPAL, RELIABLE, AND AT THE TIME, SECURE CHANNEL OF COMMUNICATION TO HANOI LAY IN MOSCOW. THIS WAS THE ONE TO WHICH WE WERE DEVOTING ALL OUR ATTENTION. 248 UNCLASSIFIED     By NWD Date 201 1 UNO'ntPaGt 03 3 a'-S ANf f W V(TAu PAT OUR HANOI.M Or B ACC SAj HATTER NOV IN A. WA. 'RsJtjO.CCD THE St. .'REcV th iHAT CHA tN.- .  H4VE DS?CR.oEu SUFF?C'ENT-Y. AND .S MUCH AS THE Ft 11 GNAt INTERESTS WfUcD PS-Mi. WhaT TOOK PLACE ON THAT CHANM.u FhcRc WfR?VUnSIR OF PROPOSALS PtL FORWARD ANO .' I US Ac . NF HACNSROt't OF THOEL PROO5O.S THAN THE PRESIDENTS loTTEIt WlTH A SPECIFIC ACTION PRO'-OS.N.o SHOULD B REwDI AND WAS READ 1N HANC1 r P 0 SG '.3 . L I V OF A tit NN E, DEVS-OP INC i HR QUO I! SaGNS .ND AS-'NOPi WA, OF COURSE. THERE. BUT WE MaD NO DOUBT H; . WHAT I-IiNO- was RFAth  I STEN I NG "0 EAS tvA ' WAS SA.O IN MGS-Ctp . of THIS WaS CUH  N'l ID IN 710 R$ 1 DE M ; 3 LE-TERr IN EFFECT WHAt WAS blD THROUGH BAGGS AND aSHMORc WAS  GENERA. .NS1STCNCS ON RESTRAINT. W.-IAT HAS $MD pl YH PUblSFEO FARTS OF THE C"!FR fX-MANGES AND MORE SEVERAL SUGGESTQNS WERE FADE A'i D'titJ PARTS TN 1-0 2 Xf u aNCE S IMS IH I E CPF 11 F I C '10 NR 0r 'SA ( " H a I M0 V EC IHE 0 U- S 7 10E OF 0'JR STs P P N G RE (n Orlc"EV S TO N tiilen S7AUJS, ANO . o b;.v,; SUESED A '.'Ef- CLEAR ANO SPFCfFlC FORM GF ACT < GN 5 lA.vt SEE NO iNrCMJMSTFNCY BETWEEN THE TwO ONE IS THE KIND 0? tESSASE YOU WqU 0 USS On AM EXE, ORA nRY nAcg TH A NEW ANO AN UNvRlED CHaNNYEv 7H GNER WAO A VoRY SPEC 1FIC Suss.ST ? 's.L01 NO r 'NE s.NRRA- CsGES .' I -> 3 IN AN "S 7 A. --3-0 TL'E CS " A 51 i sHE 0 CHANNEL waS Hi Y A IN THING--; IN A N'jTSHg,., EHAT hAS GDI NS ON WEEK MESSRS, BAGGS AND ASHMORW W4ILS WE TREATED IT SEROUS', t AND Z T a 1501 HAVE LED 70 A CHANNEL 0- COMMONiCo ' ON -- KAS D-ETiTEY SUSSIDIARY. Q UN OTHER WORDS; 01 DON " RE-aRD 1H- P iR. RE "RFC Z-RO-J' RES-Ri'-'T.. u XH"-i ;. aS USED IN N-O BA SGS iSHMORT 11" 7 L1. AS GRFAi'uY OtFERENV FRQM -sr PR.SnEN-S ATVCR; WNiCH CaLD r0R A MUTUAL D <SCA'.aTON. 'N SPEC.'-lC TERNS? A -HA7-S CORRECT-, WHA? WAS PROPOSED IN "ME PRilMHC. s ,et7EA 249 UNCLSSFlEO .     PAGE rb STATE 33365 ' IN A CONTENT THAT CALLED FOR VERY SPECIFIC AND . 'MMED1TE AtiONS CM OUR PARTs BOTH STOPP INC THE BOMBING AMD C liNG RE. Nr ORC MZ NT WAS A VERY SPElC rOR Or RES-RAJC ON "HE PaRT OF HANOI . 0 COU.D WE CLARIFY THIS QUESTION OF THE DATES OF THE PRESlDENT S LETTERS? Tl-IlS IS NOW SEPTEMBER ON MARCH 2S7-.r KEEN 7 icS. LEITERS WERE MADE PUBLIC BY HANOI; THE' STA" DEPaRTMEN- D p US THE PR-SIDiNtS LETTER WAS DATED FEBRUARY 2ND- NOW, SEVERAL MONTHS AYER, WHEN THE DATE MaY HAVE iOME SiC F; C.lCE, YOU SUDDEM'.-! SAT MRe ASHMORE HAS MISIAKENlY ST A 7 ZD Th S OATe. ; AT THE TIME YOU TOLD US -- THE DEPARTMENT TOLDUE i " HANDED OVER 1N MOSCOW ON THE STHs WE NEVER 30? a.N EtAN ON OF THE DECAY- WHY IS 1 THAT SUDDENLY THE DAVE -S BEING CHANGED? I A 70 THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE IT ISit BEING CHANGED. HAVE BEFORE Me THE -PUBLIC iN.-ORMAT OM SERIES OF 7HF DEPARTMENT ! OF STATE. UNDATED, WHiCH WAS  HE COMPENDIUM ON A NUMBER gF THINGS THS WAS LATE MARCH. BUT I AM SURE ? 7 TS W CI WHAT WAS SAID .BEFORE  WHICH DATES TriE LE""ER AS iHE 21-;  RtSPcC'Se I Witt SAt FOR HE RECORD? ' H- LETTER .5 = TRANSMITTED ON THE EARLY HORNUNG OF "HE S7h IN M0SC0A.. AND IT IS DATED THE SAME DAYc . Q WHEN N A S I' WRITTEN? A IT 1S 7H . E Fr EC  IVE 0 A E e W  NO GO  NTu TH EX A7 DATE ON WHl'CH 27 Was WRITTENo THAT SEEMS ?O ME A METTER OF INERNAL. G-veRNHENT SUS1NESS- BUT -FATS "HE DATE ON WMZcH IT WAS WRITTEN- AND DEL'VEREDo Q YOU ARE CON7RAD.-CTINg -HE S7A IEEEN7 "HE pRa2 iTi-v7 GAVE 7 -og fiMt If WAS wR.T-ENv ON IRE ?ND A F I AM IT IS BECAUSE WE MADE A HSTaKE. CHAL, ON on THERE HAS NEVER BEEN THE SL1GHTES" OOUEl IN OUR tENd ON ".-IE DATE YHaT MS INVOLVED 250 UNCUSSrFZED . -----M.T&.X----------------------------------------------------MX    UNCLASSIFIED . ' . ' ' . PAGE 05 STATE 39365 Q YOU ARE SAYING WAS WRITTEN AMD DiViVERtD BOTH ON IHg 8'R. A HA7 IS THE 0FrICIA V&RSIONa AMD IT 1S QaTLD THE CV'-R Q W" 1-10 J f ASKdiu FOR A SPaC. DAVE Cm D.'1"  i iG m 1 .S H I N G T CM LE' ME AS' NHA  M J t H BE A RELaED QUESI1ON. tsT WU 100.0 tnH aSHmORE AND BAGGS ON THE DRA."".' OR 'Ft" .'GJ AWARE OF A FIRM 'TEXTUAL VERSION C THE LE "R NHI0H HAS DELEVERED '.HERE TO MOSCOW ON THE 8Th? t A I HON1 RESPOND TO THAT BECAUSE 17 -NVOVES A 0100.1 .0? Of 7 ri. EXACT 0 P S R A t ; 0 N S Or GO V E Ft N Ft LN . U I -,.  . < TH,, ", He Lt 7 7 E R THAT WAS WORKED OUT W-TM MESSRS BAGGS AND ASHMORE 100 Fli. ACCOUNT 07 EVER THING THAT WaS MAKING PtAs-a a HD cOr.r-w D IN THE MOSCOW CHANNEL 1 Q BUT THE 8THTHE .LETTER Cr THE 81H HAS oSP'JRR.D Ms> i THlNK IT SAYS HEREa BY DEVELOPMENTS THAT TOOK FLA-E 2N LONDON ON CHE 7Ho HAS THIS A REACTION? A THEY MADE CONTR -BUT ON TO 17 o V JILL NEaVE P At .MAE. Q LET Mt GET A CL aR IF 2 C AT I ON IF 1 MAY r'ER-o YOU SAID Y.OK ACCOUNT Of EVERYTHING TH A 7 HAS TkKlNG F-sCZ. ANO WAS CO. 7 N11. AIE D WAS THROUGH >0 MOScOE CI-iANNe IS THA) REEL 1? A T H A  ( 3 -ORR E Co Q WOU.D YOU COUNt THE.LCNDZN KOSYS Z NZN 1 SON Or-R A  ON iS Ry OF THE MOSCOW -HANN; A NO, ES5E NT Z ALL 7 NO-7 HESS NERE D.tCi SS.ONS S ZI hEM LREci.L'R KOSYGiNy WhO WAS CCnDU-TING A 1013 SChTOIMEO 1051, ANO PRIMS MiNZSTER WelSONu AND TtlSE aE- j; S (EE ,1. N ; N THE 'TWO MEN WERE DISCUSSING RELaYED TOPl-S AND  NF-E- .o GO' N0RD 0 WnA i WAS SE.NG S...0 j Q WaS THE VERSihM OF  HE uE .E . h.'7 WAS  i , C.RH ;im;T THc 87H Or FEBRUaRV -- "AS TriR X;; OF .H, . V.-RS.C '.sECv PAR'.'? ON REPORTS FROM LONDON 0 A CCN;?SA NUM 70 -O. CM 251 UNCLASSIFIED ON IN      UNCLASSIFIED FACE 06 STATE 39365 THE 77H? A ' WONT GO IMTQ IHA" OTHER THAN "c SAY -H WHAT .'.S S.- '-IN THE u-E-TER TOOK ACCOUNT OF ALL THE INFORMA' ZON Aval A? 70 J S 0N A. L CHA N NE L S t 0 rWERE HAVE SEEN a NUMBER OF THESE PEACE PROPOS S r Ou-KIND OR ANOTHER.. AND, IN MY MEMORY THE g DE,IT H >3 NEVER RESPONDED JO IT v N SUCK DETAIL aND WpTH SUCr, GR- il ELABORATE CAREo -AN YCU .EXPLAIN WHY YOU ARE Ou-NG 17 "N TECS CASE AND DID NOT Im THESE F'REV"O'JS CASES? A well, I DEPENDS ON THE cTsA IN THIS CASS> WE ARE CONFRCNTM WI.H A V ' . , a T LEu 3g; gy aoqAT yOxo 3 ALMOST E ERV .'Nc IN THIS RESPONDS ;N ONR WAY OR ANOTHER IR-cT. Y On <0 ; HE AC'-OUNi .HAT MR ASHMORE HAS GIV-Ns I Th NF wrur it TO EVERYBODY TO GVE A FULL ACCOUNT AND SINCEAaRE DEALING WITH A 'FULL. AND 1 AM AFRAID 'M? SLcADl'NG ACCOUN't WE 'i'HOUGhI W HAD TO DEAL. WITH 7H1S ONE IN W m.-JkFR o-i' WE HAVE DISCRIBEDv  MR= MCCLOSKEY t EXCUSE ME a YOU MIGHT ALSO RE;. -,l . s "NE EXCHANGE IN THE ZVaLIaN CHANNEL THERE bAS  VERY COMpAhecTuf ACCOUNT OF THAT PROVIDED HERE., " " Q THE FANANI? M R o MCCLOSKEY r A N F A NI c A (MR. BUNDY CONTINUED ANSWERING QUESiCN) WE HAVE HAD "0 DO THIS WHERE THE M." Su ENDING Ac COUNTS u THA" TOOK PeACc ARE eU . QU s ZN DEnMto ''HERE IS NO OTHER A u "ERNA" IVE e 0 FROM HlNDSlGHll IT S ALWAYS EASIER RO FIGURE THEE. -HiNGS OUT; BTi .ROM WHAT YOU MAV. SAID YOU THOUGh ' THAT 'op .sirtlRE BAGGS CHaNNEs Ml'GHT OFFCR SOM. SUBS; D ; ARy ; "S7r.i-T THlNGo xN R-TROSPECTy WAS .>-& ANY CONS 2 DERA 7T0N " JUS i FOp , uN I NG ACTION i HROUn. ."Hi'JR C e A N Nu. uMl FoS'r'-N" h A 0 o J . i. c N H . o  E i c. Uu,  11'(  N y L" o y  c CON 71N D S W E S A L  . N THE i C R < E MI y 11 ; p 252 UNcLASi-FXED I      1 e r o<e;i . CilAv o'1 I Z 1 ? . I .1 PAGt 131 A WEL1-I OF THE .LA STAND ON LET ME SaY WHAT THE PROBLEM NOU.. H A 7 o ,M S S R S o 8G S S A N D A S H M C R -A RESPONSE 3s MADEv AND mA01 GU1 7 f-t E Y H A D SOME . N D . C A i . 0 N S & 1 H A RECORDED ACCOUNT WhA" WiH HO. HAVE CHECK. IMMEDIATE S" STR'0NGiY 70  I THINK.- FRANKLY.- THAT HAD OR SOMETH!'NG 0 ELSE WAS 6 OF WHICH5 WOULD HAVE RkEJUD A HERE HAV"Ni I No F THAT SCR;, ONJ OR THAT LA"TER OF WH EN AROUSED-0 TH. VERY 0 WELLp WHY EHN THEY HA RA MADE R 0 H They d aND MAC K,ONE UN WE SAID THEIR SU kE WERE H. T.r  Em Ml -c A r; Q YOU USED THEM AS FALL GUYSs A WEI ; HAVE BEEN GuAD W K 3 CH W-Shu IN THAT RESPiC HANOa MAY hlSH 0 ONLY REA IN MOSCOW A 9 NO CrtiCi'. BU" IN TERMS 0" AT btS SA" HANG1 HAD AMY YTMING DIFFERENT- In SIR KNC.' . bi NO UGH W HOM l C U N NI  0 ft.' 01. I COMMON; IE HAD ' i r L li. It; CC.-x j CO N 0 YE 70 0 I R1T L -PEN Q WHY W AS S EN A ; 0R F J L 8R 2 GH" N H A WELL. M'v UNDERST HAD DISCUSSES WtTH AND TH AT J AL '.H0J3K MES 0 U FI ED Li r U 253      .     .     tE0 PAGE 1-0 FULBRI IN AND . H  ASHMORE SA.'S- I AM NOT AB SO SOMEONE THAT ASKED HIM NOT TO FORTH --'- NOT TO APPEAR 2EFORE ARISEN IN MINDS MORE CYNICAL ADMINISTRATION MI3HT NOT HAVE FY UP 0 CO MM )7it MY DEN, N STRING I IT ThERE S HE r;< ALONG TO KEEP M FROM SO I NG Up ON SUPPORTING SALISBURYS RE. R c ND A ABSOLUT NOTt BOBBINS WORE CONCERNED THEY FULL NtS ART I CL WERE TURN TO MAKE THIS KIND C HADr IN ANY EVEN AND THEY ACRE').. ctRSCE, THE CUE hi E n ?H CONFIDENTIAL I THINK REASONABLY AND W-SELY MCLUDED Y HAD NOT -IN THEIR NEJ ACCOUNTS DOWN THE RESPECT OF ARTIC BUT f H E R E v> R RIGHT OF E 0 THE BOMB IN NO DESIRE TO., < E b . 10 N 01 L r; A .'.ND.- INDEED FULLY AS HE KNEE A Q MaY IS WHY K A QUESTION HERE? A POINT SINCE THESE TWO GENTLEMEN DIPLOMATIC ROLE., WITH AT E X T t N I = ABOUT THE IT SECRET? WHY "HER IN A DU'S 3 SOME N TO W I TH u) m A LET ME ONE 13  I AM AGRA ID. NV r THAT WERE KNOWN ONLY 0 . N T 0 r W 0 I K D 1 VI D U A TEST . > P 0 IN THE AD KT ION -- W H SECRETS A HAND"! WILL AL TO SAj x N2 TO GIVE aN DUDMAN IS SETTER INFORMED TH TH. UNFORTUNATE DISCLOSURE 0' AND, OPt AT R; 1 I U c  H tUCH N j Up 0 1 HANO; INCLUDED MRo ASI AM I WRONG, MR DUDMAi TH A MRo DUDMANs 1 DONT KNCW W YOU 256 5. U N C L Ttrf .     UNCsaSSIF D 39365 A N S W E R  N c ; ?NG Ej rw 3 A C K G1 YOU ' H C H A N N?.1. ER H R 0 J G. i A N Y r. -LOS GIVI DZ1AING AGA.NS7 INS, UDE F SANCTION 70 THEIR APPROACH TO HaNGIs A7 TFO SA GOING 0 MAKE ANOTHER VERY OFFLit A M1GH7 MAKE HANC- WONDER who WAS TALK" GOVERNMtN? HRt DUOMaNs THE FACT THAT BY ANY MEANSA AMD 1T W E. GAVE NO CORREC A WE ONt "HINK ThERE COULD HAVE SEEN ANO THE mESSASE THAT WaS SWEN WAS.. AS t WITH THE TOTALITY OF WHa" t THAT HANO1 MOULD UNOERS .'AN;' PAGE i A UtR, BUNDY S SOMEONE ASSOCIATED WITH TH MRe- DUDNaN THA i I r e- H E W A S H N N . L ENTER A WEUL> WAS IT SOMEBODY WHO HAD HEARD IT A LET ME HE .'RU WAS HE OE THAT EX.S EVEN A" WHaV AS A MATTER C BY aSHNGRE IT .7 J ME AND WE D.-A t 7 N < a 2 PR 70 ; v,NO DON 7 ENH 7HE W.RE DEAL1NG WITH A Ct-.NNFL LONG 1N US TIMES OF 7RANS-; A VERY D;R AND lyMSD b . ON A H A N N L! o 5TH, FRAN C V F R ' E -= H1 SAFiE EE WER KI i? W THr Ns HA NOi, IN A SOPHISTICATED WAt Q BOTH YOU AMD HR. aSHMO CUT MlNht AND HIS CONVER 0 TO ANS BUSINESS .H A 3 EM ON. A it 3ri3o .J 257 .    By NWD Dale 2011  . UNCLASSIFIED PAGE 12 S-aTE 33365 4 , I ' THE NEED FOR THE U.S. TO AGREE 70 STOP RpNp0Rc-NG t'C 7F1 IN THE SQUYMo NOW.' aS FAR AS i KNOW;, THIS DEMAND 4A Nt . ' o ANYWHERE Et.SE PUBLI-Lt WAS IT MADE AN'W ELSE PR' 7. A OH, T H A < 1 $ N0 j T U RE o H iS QLES ICN 0 CARG NG US W , - CONTINUING R I N r 0 R M C E N E hi 7 S GOES 8 A K > AI H V R Y i I. 70 THE 37DAY PAUSE IN EARLY 1956= I Q BUT DIRECTLY CONNECTED AS A PRIOR CONDITION Or TALKS? A I AM NOT SURE WHETHER EE HAD EVER HEARD I BEFORE-. R'J" WF HAO CER.AlNLV HEARD ENOUGH REnARhS N ,Hi3 eEM-RA, AREA TO BE AWARE OVER A LONGj LONG PERIOD THAT7HiS WAS A POSS'cLE ADDITIONAL ELEMENT, IF WE COUc.0 WORK OUT A BALANCED PRC OR s' OF MUTUAL DEESCALATIONu Q WELL, ON PA0E THREE- Q "N THE MOSCOW CHANNEL DID VOU EVER MENTION THE BlSCSMSNo LE'rER-i OR WHAT WASA J CANT C0MMEN  ON TH A1. TO 7n- BEST Or M Y REC0,1EC It 0Ni WE DID N0o Q ON PAGE THREE- GETTING BACK TO "HE QUESTION Ra'"S.D'J' IS WRI "Ten HERE AS 7 HOUGH HO IS > INSISTING ON TWO 01100 BEFORE AGREEEIMG TO TALKS; BC.t A STOP TO THE EOMoN; AND A STOP TO REjNrORCEMENTSe MCW 7117.0 A YESe U 0 WELLp TWO QUESTIONSs WAS THAT YOUR UfDERSVaND1 NG 0- HuS POSITION, BASED ON O7HSR EVlOENCs? AND-' S-C-Nj; Y. IS THAT ','OJR UNDERSTANDING OF HO'S pOSiTlCN TODAY? Au WELL, The STATEMENTS IN PaRASRPAh rOCR FOR "4-13- AND ARE D-RcC-LY rRO'M TH,. 01C i A i ED ACCCJE' 3Y MESSRS s 3 335 AND ASHMORE  Q RIGHT 1 t j ! ' UNCLASSIFIED 258      ,o' N I o. PAGE 13 S'.'ATE 33365 U V A SO 1 AM PREPARED TO ACC EPt " i i HOu QUFsAlONW "Ha7 THAT IS WH.-F HO SAD ON IT IS ENtR.LY POSSIBLE 70 SEE iN BURCHE" PRES'DEN I N7.RV IN HO S THE R1NH T; T1O , F 1 t AND 1K OTHER NORTH VIE . NaM MENTI'qN C" ..-MS JSSiJEo NOWy i Will LEAVE SUBSEQUENT STATEN A7 HA7 . IN UH-R T0 T k A E TM1S POSITION -AMY BE. I REGRET TO SAY A T THi S M 0MENI 07 TIEs EXCEPT 70 SAY THAT THE Q o WELL DID YOU USE GENTLEMEN 70 FASHION A o Was PART OF THi SNAuL PART J I INDEED NO POSITION Pl Or COURSE AVAILABLE >0 AL1 0 MA'7ERS< Qo OF A AR i NOT INCutl CT UE. Nt. HA Do BL1 "RVj ED ANY PAR AT A-L 3. " US NuG WERE WCOV1N3 CM-' 1- IN OTHER WCRDS, REINFORCEMENT BE Y OU GO; V SPEC.FI THRObSH B 70 NO HAVE TOTAL PICTURE Cr MUTUAL DE-E OUR MINDS2 ANO HAD SEEN RalS IF YOU WI SO 1 WAS > ON Tri. J aNUARY OM.EThTNG THa'.' a. LONG PERIOD C.- . N a. what ASHMORE REC 1 PROC J a POSSSts f 7ION HAD LOr Ha NO? o .  O (tl 50 ON Or Th GUR70 I DQM 3 Y UNDERSTAND J BROUGHT SACK "HE WORD V  E W i Z 7 W A S A N MEAN ANYTHING YOU JUST 7R.L " IT'S HOPELESS, ONWH A 3 S U R D H 0 W A N 7 ON HOL0M PE AC- E US 70 STOP BOMS HIM, "LOOM,  'S NO" GC'N OR HA" ?. AN I Rg . o 259     By NWD Dale 2011 UNCLASSIFIED PAGE 14 STATE 39365 , A, WELL, IF YOU ACCEPTED EVERY NEGATIVE STATEMENT BY lANOl aS LED G THE DOOR TO ANY POSSIBILITY OF EXPLORATION, WE WOULD PLAINLY GET NOWHERE I THINK YOU HAVE TO GO ON PROBING, AND YOU HAVE TO RECKON " Qo IT WONT DO ANYTHING? Ao LET ME FINISH; YOU HAVE TO RECKON THAT THIS WAS ,.N EM jUN-N WITH INDIVIDUALS, TO WHOM HO MIGHT TAKE A HARDER POSmON TriAM HE WOULD "AKE IN-SECRET, CONFRONTED WITH A C01SCRE7E PRCPOSf'CE OR with GENERAL SUGGEST IONSi AND TRIS IS WHAT WAS DONE IN S-O -BUT YOU CANT TAKE A NEGATIVE STATEMENT TO AN I ND IVAu AS FORECLOSING THE DESIRABILITY OF PROBING ON jf. IT IS MUSI HOT THE WAY YOU NEGOTIATE IN AMY SaTUATION 8 OR TRY TO GE' 10 a POINT OF NEGOTIATING i GUESS I HAD BETTER SAYe Qo DO YOU PLAN TO HAVE SCHROENBRUM WRITE A LETTER WHEN HE G S BACK? A. WE HaVE HAD NO CONTACT FOR THAT PURPOSE Qo DID THEY EVER TELL YOU ANYTHING THAT HO SAW THAT MADE AN OF YOU FEEL FOR A MINUTE THAT MAYBE HO WANTED TO MAKE PEACE? A. THEY DID SAY THaT THE TONS OF "HE CONVERSATION. AND THIS 1S WHAT ASHMORE SAYS IN THE ARTICLEr WAS CONC111ATORTf GM THESE KEY POINTS- THEIR DICTATED ACCOUNT DID NOT APPEAR "0 INDICATE  ' ANY GIVEo NONElHELESS THE FaC" sHaT HE WAS PREPARED. 0 RECEIVE TYMP TO EXPRESS Hl'S VIEWS--H WAS CERTAIN OMISSIONS IMTHC CONVERSATION IT WaS THE KIND OF CONVERSATION WE HAVE HaD REPORTED 70 US OVER A LONG PERI-OD OF 71 ME FROM MANY SOURCES, AND IT IS VERY HARD EVER TO GIVE A CAPSULED 'SUMMARY TUA" GEMS. THE FULL FLAVORo THEY THOUGHT 17 WaS CONCILIATORY -- MIP.EL f THE FACT HAT THEY WERE RECEIVED AND TALKED TO IN THIS WAY. AND THAT -HE TONE NAS CONCILIATORY ANDj F COURSE THEY WERE THERE. QU I BELIEVE THE ASHMORE ARTICLE SaYS THAT HO MADE A -ATEGOR. C,V COMMITMENT. OR IT IS INCORRECT -- I- REFERS TO HDS CATEGORICAL COMMITMENT 70 TALK IF TRE BOMBING WERE STOPPED. DO YOU REMEMBER THIS -- SOME SUCH PHRASE AS THIS? ' . 260 UNCLASSIFIED      UNCLASSIFIED PAGE 15 STATE 33365 Ao I DONT RECALL IT IN THE LETTER. Qo IT waSNT THAT, BUT VERY CLOSEe Qo IT IS NOT IN THE LETTERS 1'7 IS IN THE ARTIC-Ec ' 7 ,  Ac now, wait a Second do rr again  ph sgrryo Qa HAS HO CHI M-NH EVER EITHER PUBLICLY OR IN SECRE'.' EXCHANGES- MADE A FIRM COMM.TMENTj A r I RM S7ATEMENT HAf 7r BOMBING OF NORTH VIETNAM WAS STOPPED HE WOULD ENVER PEACE i'A-KJ . Ao TO THE BEST OF MY KNOwlEDGE THE ANSWER TO THAT QUCSTtON ,S-"NOo" I KNOW OF NOTHING- CERTAINLY, NOTHING "FIaT HAS BEEN CONVEYED AUTHORITATIVELY O US ThAT SAYS THAT FLA'.iY-- ' Qo DO YOU HAVE ANY INFORMATION.. t Qo THROUGH THESE THIRD PARTIES, THEY ALWAYS USE THE OONO g'ONAL. COULD, OR SOMETHING LIKE THATo Ao THAT HAS BEEN THE NORMAL FORMULATION. THERE HAVE BEEN THIRD COUNTRY REPORTS THAT INDICATE IT IS MORE POSITIVE, BUT NOTHING THAT HAS BEEN CONVEYED OR INTENDED TO SE CONVEYED 70 US; THAT I AM AWARE OF Qo DO YOU get IN What IS CONVEYED TO YOU THE USE OF .'ME ' CONDITIONAL? A= THATS THE NORMAL FORMULATiONv 0, DID THE STATE DEPARTMENT AT ANY TIME EVER FEE, VHa" THESE TWO MEN WOULD HAVE AN > BENEFICIAL AFFECT ON TALKS OR WERE f H E Y JUST BEiNS PAMPERED? A. NO, aS I SAID BEFORE. THEY HAD ACTED REASCNABU7 AND RESPONSIBLY- THEY HAD CAREFULLY GON. OVER -HZ POSZCON BEFORE THEY WENT" THEIR ACCOUNTS OF THE CONVERSATIONS I ND1CAED TNaT IN SO FAR AS THEY PURPORTED TO DESCRIBE THE VIEWS OF THE 30'0Ri TREY HAD DONE so HONESTLY AND FAIRLYo THEY HAD AGREED 70 RtPCRt 261 .     ,i UNCLASSIFIED PAGE 6 STATE 39365 r CONFIDENTIALLY WHEN THEY GOT BACKS AND "HEY HAD DONE SOv THEY REPORTED THAT THEY HAD A WAY Or COMMUNICATING Ulf  HANOI., WE ARE PREPARED TO "RY ANY WAY OF COMMUNICATING WITH HANq IT DIO NOT SEEM TO BE PERFECTLY H0NSST -.LIKEuY HAT CJ WOULD OPEN UP A NEW INDIRECT;? AND VERY -- I WON-I SA' 7  jg WELL, I WOULD SAY TENUOUS -- BUT. RUNNING THROUGH a. S TO PHNOM PENH, AND SO ON, DIDNT GIVE ONE THE VAST FEE. ;NG . THAT THIS WAS GOING TO OPEN UP'o BUT NONETHELESS W- WERE PREPARED TO GIVE IT A CHANCEc Ir THEY HaD. IN SOME FASH;-! STRUCK HO AS PARTICULARLY REASONABLE MEN THROUGH WHOM HE C-NL LIKE TO DEAL THIS WAS CERTAINLY WORTH WHATEVER SMAL CHANCE t there Might be That this WOULD ccme OFF UQ. A RELATED QUESTION. BILLo iN THE L-.AST SENTENCE .OF YOUR STATEMENT YOU SAY " eo THAT THE PRESENT D T SC..0SUR. Wj NOREASSURE HANOI "HAT SUCH PRIVATE CONTACTS WiL, BE KEPT SECRET." ARC YOU SAVING THIS MIGHT HAVE A SERIOUS AFFECT ON ,NY CONTACTS OR NEGOTIATIONS THAT ARE UNDERWAY NOW? Ao I-THINK I WILL LET THE STATEMENT SPEAK FOR ITSEF, SPENCER. I THINK I" IS A SELF-EVIDENT STATEMENT Qo RELATED TO THE LAST QUESTiON OVER HERE. ON THE PAHPERTMGp DOCS THE FACT THAT THIS HAD SENATOR FULBRIGHT'S IMPR.MATUR CAUSE YOU 70 GIVE IT MORE CREDENCE? Ao WELL. IT WAS AN ELEMENT Or FACTf PHIU BUT i WOULDN'T ATTEMPT TO GIVE ANY WEIGHT 70 He THE REAL QUESTION WAS 1.0-"HER IT WAS A CHANNEL WORTH SEEKING A PROBE TO SEE IF 1T OPENED AND 70 SaY NOTHING IN IT INCONS;SrENTo A GENERAL. MESSAGE CONSISTENT WITH WHAT We WERE SAYZNG IN THE DIRECT CHANNEL. Q. WOULD YOU EXPLAIN WHAT YOU MEANT Bt USING THE WORD "MISLEADING" EAR.iER .ABOUT THE ASHMORE ART I-- ?N WHA7 SENSE? A o MISLEADING IN THE VERY BASIC SENSE "THAT IT TAKES NO ACCOUNT OF MATTERS THAT ARE MATTERS OF PUBLIC RECORD- I aM SIMPLY ASTOUNDED, TO BE PERFECTLY BLUNT ABOU" if -MAT MRo ASHMORE -" WHO SEEMS TO HAVE STUDIED THE PRESiD.NT S DOESNvT TAKE NOTE OF THE FACT HaT THE FRESHEN"-S ; ET ZER 262  UNCI ASS IFTFD      Errs ov PAGE 17 STATE 39365 Department of State UNCLASSIFIED s PUBLISHED OF COURSE; UNILATERADlY BY HANG REFERS 1'0 CONTACTS WHICH HAVE TAKEN PLACE UN YOU GENTLEMEN AND LaDZES KNOWa TH; WITH THE DEPARTMENT SPOKESMAN WHEN by HANOIO HAD BEEN 0 0 R SIDE, AND THE DEPARTMENT SPQl1 0 N T A C T S > A N D THAT SEVER "HINGS REACHED Li SPEC -MCA S QUEST-ON HAS RAJSEt THE .LETTER HAS SMAN CONFIRMED POINT WHERE NE li MADE CARRIED ON- OF ITS PERSONAL PROFILES Of THE GlMTIEK WHO WAS BELIEVED TO HAVE CONDUCTED THE DISCUSSIONS MR. ASHMORE COU-D AtEMpT TO DESCRlB. OUR WITH HIM, EXTENDING QUITE SEl.;--E WITHOUT ANY REFERENCE 70 THE POSf A PROBLEM IN OUR MINDS 07 THE REL DENTlY OVER THE SAME THERE rM- lONSHIP BUT SEEMS' TO ME TO DESERVE THE WORD MISLEADING. Qo WE ARE ALWAYS IN A POSITION OF DISCUSSING 7 OU LIKE THIS EIGHT OR NINE MONTHS At'ER TO AV01D HIS EIGHT MONTHS FROM NOW, YOU ;NVOVED GREAT EFFORT WITH HANOI AT "-ME? Ao I 7HJNK YOU KNOW MY ANSWER TO THAT? ANSWER NO TO THAT WE ALWAYS GIVE TO QUESTIONS BE READ ONE WAV OR ANOTHER AND IT IS THE STOCK OF THIS SORT ;t THAT IS "NO COMME IT WAS WORTH A TRYo IS NEGO7;AT IONS? THIS USING THE PRESS MED.A 70 CARRY 0 o Q . A o r M N USING WHAT? Q. THE PRESS MEDIAo . WELL, I.WOULDN'T DESCRIBE ? IN "Ha- SENSE BECAUSE IN  . respect to the Views THAT They gc) from Us. and Their hparTzng OF THOSE VlEWSs AND THEIR IMPARTING BACK TO US WHAT Uri SaID TO THEM, IT WAS QUITE C-FaRLY UNDERSTOOD WITH MESSRS- AGGS ANO ASHMORE THAT THY WERE ACTING AS AMERtCAN C 71 ZENS NO NOT AS PRESS MENc THE' UNDERTAKINGS EXCHANGED BETWEEN USo IN Ei-ECT, . 263 UNCLASSIFIED .     UNCLASSIFIED page 18 state S93&5 ..WERE UNDERTAKINGS THAT THEY WOULD NOT PUBLISH ThIS Qo DO YOU FEEL THEY HaVE BROKEN 'THAT UNDERTAKING BY PUBL.SHING WHAT THEY .HAVE PUBLISHED? r g Ao I WlLl- LEAVE THAT FOR YOU TO JUdGEj AND r H;L uEa'E , ' tTHE LAST SENTEN'E OF HE RELEASEQ. JUST To CLARIFY ONE POINT HERE, ANO TO GET THE MA.'N fo.JST ... OF ONE OF THE POINTS "HAT YOU ARE MAKINGS IS IT  ACCURATE 0 SAY THE EXISTENCE OF THE SECRET MOSCOW CHANNEL WAS KG ' 0.iCtCSEu TO THESE TWO GENTLEMEN. BECAUSE 17 WAS FEARED "HAT D;SCO- MG IT IN SECRET TO THEM MIGHTSOMEHOW JN SOME NAT DESPU'E "HEER BEST EFFORTS LEaD TO EXPOSING WHaT YCU9E-IEVED TO BE A PouM MNb ot CHANNEL OF CONTINUING DiRECT NEGC!ATON? . Ac THATS TRUEe THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE MOSrQW CHANNEL MS EXTREMELY CLOSELY HELDa NOW; FOR "Ob'IOUS REASONS, YOU CaN 'CONDUCT SECRET DIPLOMACY WITHOUT THATAtO SUGGEST VRt' TWO PRIVATE CITIZENS, HOWEVER WELL-MEAN 1NGa SHOULD 30 INFORMED 17 SEEMS 70 ME, ON ITS FACE? AN UNWISE SUGGESTION. Qo WAS THERE ANYTHING EXCHANGED 1N THE MOSCOW CHANNEL PRiOR ;o THE PRESIDENTS LETTER TO HO THAT GAVEYOU ANY ENCOURAGEMENT? Ao I HAVE SAID IN THE STATEMENT THE ONLY ANSWER I WI, GIVE TO THAT, WHICH IS THAT WE NEVER HAD ANY USEFUL RESPONSE TO AN. OF THE PROPOSALS BUT, TO REPEAT, YOU KEEP TRYING. Q. ON PAGE SEVEN OF YOUR STATEMENT YOU SAY THAT YOU u c 8 NOTE WITH REGRET THAT MRo ASHMORE IS APPARENTLY IGNORANT OF "HE SUBSEQUENTLY PUBLISHED REPORTS OF HE MOSCOW CCN"ACVS, AND of THEIR CONFIRMATION BY DEPARTMENT REPRESENT a 7 I VES =- WE NOTE W-TH STILL- GREATER REGRET THAT AT NO TIME SINCE HAS HE CONSULTED WITH THE DEPARTMENT IN ORDER TO ATTEMPT TO UNDERSTAND . , AND SO ON, ANO SO ON ARE YOU SAYING THERE THAT YOU HAD NO CONTACT WITH HIM SlNCE HO PUBLISHED THE LETTERS? AND WOULDNT IT HAVE BEEN, PERHAPS.. WISE TO HAVE CALLED HIM AND SAID; NOU'YOU SEE WHY WE .SkE Sq CAREFUL" AND SO ON? 264 ,t s UNCLASSIFIED       viTULAao id1 . A . ' ' . PAGE 19 STATE 39365 Ao I SAY THAT WE HaVc CERTAINLY HAD NO CONTACTS OF M.;-D ... THAT IS DESCRIBED IN THE SENTENCE" I AM NOT AWARE OF ANY GF ANY SORT. WE HAVE KEPT IN TOUCH WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTER AND WE MAY HAVE TALKED TO MR. AXMRE ON MATTERS KE-tt TO THE GENEVA CONFERENCE, IN MAYo I SUPPOSE WE C0lj.D HAVE TRIED TO CLARIFY IT, BUT WE COULDNT HAVE GONE 7 U3PAR WHAT WOULD HAVE SEEMED TO MOST OF US A FAIRLY SELF tvd ; CONCLUSION FROM THE PUBLISHED REPORTS# Qo DID THE DEPARTMENT LEaRN IN ADVANCE THAT HE WAS GOjNG 70PUBLISH THIS PIECE? ( N  <; ' I GM .S' t' .' Ao NOj WE HAD NO KNOWLEDGE WHATSOEVER I S I ' . , Qc WHY DIDNT YOU INCLUDE IN MRo ASHMORE  S .LETTER A SPECU l CONDITION .LIKE THE PRESIDENT MADE? Ao WELL. LET ME PUT YOURSELF IN OUR SHOES. WE HAD A VERY ONjC.Nc DIRECT CHANNELS WE HAD IN THE BAGGSASHMORE THING ON.' THE CONCEIVABLE MAKINGS OF A CHANNEL 70 STARTa ON VMS FIRST COMMUNICATION, THROUGH A NEW AND UNTRIED CHANNEL WITH SOME-.. G SPECIFIC iS NOT, PERHAPS ALWAYS THE WISEST STRATEGY.. PAR 1 . WHEN YOU HAVE GOT A DIRECT CHANNEu THROUGH -Uh I CH  YOU CAN SAY ' ANYTHING YOU WANT o Qo MRs BUNDY, ARE THERE ANY MORE OF THESE FREE-LANCE OFF0RTS ; GOING ON,isiNCE THEN? Ac WELLP LET ME SAY THERE HAVE BEEN A GREAT MANYc AND I WON'T COMMENT CN WHETHER THERE ARE ANY UNDER WaY a" THE PRESET" 'TlMf. FOR THE SAME REASONS THAT 1 GAVE -HE .RESPONSE I DID TO MR KAuB. THIS HAS BEEN RECURRENT; AMD. AS WR MAKE CLEAR rN H1S STX7EMEN7 REASONABLE AND DISCREET ACTION BY PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS ZS SOMETHING WE ARE PREPARED TO cO = CRERATE WITH. I? HAS TO BE HEMMED AGAINST THE TOTAL PICTURE OF CONTACTS THAT EX,ST A7 AN ' ONC71M Qo' SHALL WE MEET AGAIN.IN EIGHT MONTHS? (LAUGHTER  265 UNTl ASSTFIFD .     UNCLASSIFIED PAGE 20 STATE 39365 ' .. ..Q c MR8 UN0 Ya ACCORDING i 0 "HE 1E T R Hr S A t "Al R P 0 R N G ON THE LETTER -- THAT THEY SENT TO HO CHI MINH iIT S REFERRING TO THE DEPARTMENT-S OFFICIALS;- "hEY SaV. QJOTEa ;THY EXPRESS " PARTICULAR INTEREST IN YOUR SUGGESTION TO US ;HaT PRlV.-E .'AKS COULD BEGIN, PROVIDING THE U. So SoP BOMBING G'JR COUN''RY AMD CEASE INTRODUCING ADDITIONAL U c STROOPS NO VIET NATO EXPRESSED THE OPINION THAT SOME RECIPROCAL RESTRA.NTS St M DE 70 INDICATE THAT NEITHER S'DE GETS THE ADVANTAGE WHICH WOULD PROVIDE TANGIBLE EVIDENCE OF TH- GOOD tAUH OF Ai L PAR "IES N thC PROSPECTS FOR A NEGOTIATED SETTLEMENTo I RETURN AGAIN 70 MV QUESTIONS WHAT MAKES YOU SO SUES Th HANOI W ASN u 7 READING THIS AS SOM H i MG 0N", RA0 2 C  0R  70 ?1 ' C0- THEY RECEIVED LATER FROM PRESIDENT JOHNSON? Ao WeLLP BECAUSE I THINK HANOI IS SOPHISTICATED ENOUGH 0 REALIZE THAT A DIRECT CHANNEL AND A DIRECT -OMMUN1Ca"1 IM SIGNED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED S"AVESJ IS THE  'JThOR ' AT Z7E VO'CEs AND i THINK THEY WOULD HAVE SEEN CLEARsV WHAT WE w-g-DUlNSo THEY KNEW MESSRS. BAGGS AND ASHMORE, AND THEY USV HAVE SEEN CLEARLY, I THINK. WHAT THE DISTINCTION WAS. THAT DION 7 EXCLUDE THE POSSIBILITY OF SOME K1ND OE A RESPONSE; HAD THEY BEEN LESS NEGATIVE ON THE BAGGSaSHMORE CHANNEL, IF THEY WISHED TO DEVELOP IT I REALY DONT THINK SOPHISTICATED RECIPIENTS HOUuD HAVE HAD ! AN.' TROUBLE SORTING THAT ONE OUTc I  , ... q, DID YOU IN SPEAKING WITH BAGGS AMD ASHMORE =EXPRESS THE View That we shouldnt seek 73 vie any suspension CF the BOMB'NG 70 THE TRUCE IN OTHER WORDS, "AKE A POSITION WHICH APPARENTLY WAS CONTRADICTED SY THE OFFICIAL PROPOSA THAT 7H PRESIDENT MADE ONLY A FEW DAYS LARER? r.l Ao LET Mt SAY WHAT WE WERE DEALING WZ-h HERE WE WERE DEALING A WITH, AMONG 0 i HER I HINGS  I Ml NG RACtORSo THE PERIOD Or Trit TE TRUCE, THE AGREED PER 100# RAN FROM ,HE 8TH 0 THE .2TH. , WE WERE DEALING W.TH A LETTER TH'A' NAS GOING TO SE A'R lA-LED ON THE 5H TO PHNOM PENH TO SUPPOSE JHaT "7 COU..D REACH HANOI IN TIME TO REFLECT IN ANY WAY. BEFORE "HE EXPiRA''ION 07 T-E TRUCE j . A i, ' UNCLASSIFIED i i 266 .     Department of State tlTES o' UNCLASSIFIED PAGE 21 STATE 39365 PERIOD, RAn AGAINST ANY REASONABLE CAUfULA" . ON OF TIMEt AND. ALSO ' THJS HAPPENS TO FIT WITH THE SUBSEQUENT!'.' REV-ARD BY US m- TO MRv AXflRE DELIVERY DATt'r WHICH WAS THE 151H,  N PHOM PENh THERE WAS NO POINT IN WE WANTED TO Ga'" AWA  FROM THAT- AND INCIDENTALLY, TH- REFERENCE IN THE PRESIDENT S LETTER SpEAKS FOR ITSELF ON "HA" SUBJECT, aNO I Wit- uTf .. SPEAK FOR ETSEbFo BUT I THINK IF YOU REREAD tt YOU 11.. SEE THAT IT DOESN'T HAVE hE IMPL I CAT i ON i'HA T SOME OF MR . iSHMCoc S WORDS APPLY TO ITo 0, WAS THE SPECIF1C DEMAND FuR ADVANCE ASSURANCE OF THE HALT JN NOR"H VIETNAMESE INFILTRATION INTO "HE SOUTH FOrtHbuATEO BEFORE OR AFERr THE ASHMORE LE)ER WAS DRafTED? Ao THAToS NOT A QUESTION I CAN REASONABLY OR PROFI 7AR . ( DSCUS THIS IS a Line Of thoUgHT that had gcne ON FOR a owg., lows whZLEv Qc CAN you SAY WHAT l T IS- NOT FOR ER, SCALIS BENEFIT gJ-FOR THE BENEFIT OF MR a SCALIS HEARERS -- WHAT iCA'tQN .'OU ARE TANKING ABOUT WHEN YOU REFER 70 THc PRESIDENT S '..E'TER AND MRo ASHMORE'S STATEMENTS? I Ac WELL, THETREATMENT IN THE PRESIDENT'S LETTER OF ANY EXiENS'ON Or > He 1 ET TRUCE I THINK, JS OT RALLY OPFN VO "m-KiNDS OF FEARS THAT ARE ASCRIBED BY MRe ASHMORE -0 US TIP DiSCUSsIONS OF THE SAME TOPIC IN RELATION TO THEIR CONVERSAV"ON. IS THAT CLEAR? . " ' Qo NOo TRY AGAIN. Ao ALL RIGHT IF YOU GET OUT ThE PRESIDENT'S uE'TER, Yo 1 WILL SEE "HAT ITS TREATMENT OF YH.S IS NOT MADE A COND HON OR ANYTHING OF THIS SORT, IT MERELY SAID 17 WILL RE HE PFUl G YOU LOOK AT TH;S PROBLEM.- WHICH HAD BEEN -HE SUBJECT Or s -p-vrr FROM SAIGON, SY THE SOUTH VIETNAMESE GOVERNMENT, C OURSc e IF YOU COULD LOOK TO SEE IF WE COULD EXTEND THIS TH G0 RF HtlPrULs BUT ItS IN NO SENSE 7 I-LIM'TgQ CONQiVjONED 5 THA Q. DO YOU AGREE, BlL. WITH THE h'IDELV STATED VIEW Tm? "o PRESIDENTS LETTER CONSTITUTED A HARDEN I NG 7H1OME CON01710NSv UNCLASS I FI EO 267      UNCLASSIFIED PAGE 22 STATE 39365 Ac NO, I DO NOTo IT ADDED A VERY MAJOR ACTION ON OUR SIDE, THE CESSATION OF REINFORCEMENTS IMMEDIATELY. I" PROPOCED A VERY MAJOR ACTION ON THE OTHER SIDE IN RESPONSE THERE IS A LONG SERIES Of PROPOSALS OF A GENERAL SORT IN THIS .REA r-Av HAVE BEEN MADC PUBLiCbY ANO PRIVaTELYA I DO NOT CONSIDER THIS TO HAVE BEEN A HARDENING, ON THE CONIRaR'A ;7 ADDED A VERY MAJOR NEW ACTION ON OUR PART Qc THAIS THE SOFTENING  Ao I CONSIDER IT CONSISTENT WI-H THE BASIC WAY UN WHH WE HAVE APPROACHED "HIS WHOL.E QUESTION OF CESSATION; i J  ' . q. THE IMPLICATION OF ASHMORE'S STATEMENT IN HlS AR 7 st AND ( I THINK HE ALMOST SaYS IT IN SO MANY wORDS IS THAT HE HAD & GOOD THING GOING WHICH WOULD HAVE VERY.- VERY PR0BABO' .E.'.O '.0 SOME KIND OF AGREEMENT TO STOP THE WAR? AND THE PRESlOENT SENT A VERY TOUGH LETTER TO HO WHICH KNOCKED ALL IN THE HEADv NOW, IN VERY SIMPLE PEASANT LANGUAGE, THIS IS WMA7 A LOT OF THIS WHOLE CONTROVERSY IS ABOUT WILt YOU COMMENT ON KIS POiN'M . ' Au YES I WILL COMMENT TO SAY "HAT ITS AGAIN OBVIOUS TO ANY SUDEN. Gt i H. REATIV WE16Ht 10 BE A t > ACHtD 70 THE CHANNELS AS OF THAT TIME HAT THE DIRECT CHANNEL IN MOSCOW WAS 3Y "AR THE MOST IMPORtANT THINK MR aSHmORC YIELDS TO AM UNDERSTANDABLE PERSONAL FEELING THAT HIS OWN WAS THE CENTER OF "HE STAGE, THINK THE ACCOUNT I WAVE GIVEN Ma<ESCLEAR THAT IT WA.S NOT, AND IN THE NATURE OF THINGS COULD NOT BE r = . THE QUESTION IS WHAT THE SUM TOTAL OF HE EXCHANGE IS 7N M0SCOW WHICH I HaVE CHARACTERIZED AS FAR aS 1 I S IN THE NATIONAL lNTEREST TO DO AND OF TbjE PRESIDENTS LETTER,- AND WHAT HOS REPLY IS ANO 1 THINK ITS CLEAR, IF YCJ TAKE FHcSE ALL TOGETHER, THAT 'TH- READING WAS THA) HANOI HAD NO DESIRE 70 MOVE at that Times Qo TO WhAT EiEN'; DID tHE BA SOS ASHMORE REPORT HAVE 7 Hr CONVERSATION WITH HOTO WHa.T EXTENT DID VhAT CCN-RlBUl. 70 THE END PRODUCT, NAMELY THE LETTER Or FEBRUARY STH BY YHl PREsl UNCLASS I 268 1 I .     r I Eo ALREADY ANSWERED THA think I A 0 I AM NOT CLEAR WHAT I SAID WAS THAI A = SpGCK OF CONCEIVABLE SUCH lNFORNATZOM, LE-ER ANO "0 "HE IM THE HAD BUT BUT E PRESIDENT'S LETTER? Or HIS ARGUMENT 0 U Q o WI ENT Y TOTAL part. OF RESPONSE TO 7 INFORMATION THAT ANO REFERRED VO 0 M T i N YOU WILL NO'.' Say that Or" Alt I SAID A LONG THE CAY THAT YOU Dr THE PROCESS OF DRAi RELATED 70 THE BAGGS-ASHMpRE T IT WAS ri I N K Z T BUT I" WAS A PART OF OUR G  AL NO SIGNIFICANT IMPACT INFORMaTI ONo DON WRITTEN BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UN THE DRAFTING 0 TED STAfESu A- N0r I DIDNT SAY PAG. 23 STATE 39365 E VARIOUS PROPOSALS MADE JN ROSCO HAD REACHED US FROM O'?HER QUARTERS OBVIOUSLY PART OF CUR Q. BUT YOU ARE TRYING TO ANSWER HIS ACCUSATION WHAT BAGGS AND ASHMORE HAD ' that n had NO IMPACT was Qo WELL, THIS IS THE CENTRAL POINT NOY C0MMEN1 ON WAVs ARE YOU PREP A IN NO WAY ; MAG I NAB. 2 Qo COULD I ASK THE QUESTION ANOTHER SAY "HAT HE PRESIDENT'S LETTER WAS Ac NOs SIR I WIL L TH ASHMORE THaT YOU WERE MN TOTAL ANALYSIS OF ALL INFORMATION OVE NOT AT ALb, IN THE ACCOUNT I HAVE GIVEN THE EXACT DAY WHICH YOU COME TO A DECISION TO HANDLE A THING.. rtS-EuIS TO IS A MATTER THAT a GOVERNMENT IS ENTITLED 'TO ,E7 STaND iN TH RECORDO ' ... AND, IN PARTICULAR ON NON, OF COURSE, IN THAT TOTAL  GIVEN US WaS A PART OF I T o SO I WOULD SAY, MY OWN SUMMATION WAS a part of the totalityo 269      WFV ttres ' D ep a r tm e n t of PAGE 24 STATE 35365 A UNCLASSIFIED ACCUSAION IS THAT ONE-HALF OF THE GOVERNMENT DI DAU 7 THE OTHER HALF WAS DO INGAo WHO I HAVE ANSWERED THAT QUESTION TOO. I HAVE SA.D " FRAMED THS RESPONSE'THAT WAS G.VEN 70 MRt ASHMORE FULLY AWaRE OF ALL THAT WAS UNDER W OTHER CHANNELc 0 o A 0 IM WAS THE LETTER UNDER WAY AND CONTEMPLATED AT .'HAT 'IME7 THApS A QUESTION THAT I REGARD AS A MATTER OF PRIVILEGE AND NO" A MATTER IN WH- CH AN ADMINISTRATION SHOULD COMMENT 0 H POXiSMAN for "HE R SPEAKS FOR -TS Q o A 0 . A A Q b ABUT YOU YOU YOU NO-, STAND SV WHAT YOU SAID BEFORE- THAT NEVER COMMENT ON DATES LETTERS ARE WR Ter was N DID SAY 8EF0R ORIGINALLY TOLD US IT WAS WRITTEN ON- THE 2ND. 'YOU D1D I MERELY CORRECTED THE RECORD ON vHAT.CHA'o AFTER IF iT . SPOKESMEN THAT THIS FORM . GA S A 0 I BECOMES WAS SAID AT ANY THAT IT WAS FEBRUARY 2ND BY ANY ADMIN'.' SYRAU ON DOUBTLESS BOB MCCLOSKEY HAS GO MOMENT THAT DATED FEBRUARY THINK WHEN WE WAS 8"H HERE IN ERRORu I HAVE ANO this IS A MaNER SOMEBODY LOOKING- CP AT MT LETTER WAS 2N 1Ts PUBLISH! 7O1D YOU THE FACVSo GIVEN THE LETTER THERE WAS NO DAVE ON j HAT QUITE- OFTEN 'HAPPENS WITH CORRESPONDENCE 0 NORMALLY GIVEN A DATE CORRESPONDING TO TH- DATE 0.- TRANSMISSION, WHICH IN THIS WAS VERY EARLY ON 8TH , MR DAY. MCCLOSKEY RE COR THERES NO REFERENCE '.'0 FEBRUARY'? TRANSCRIPT ON ; H 17 ON  UNCLASSIFIED 270      4 4 A . 'rtfTE$ D . stave UNCLASSIFIED pagE 25 state 33355 A a AND I REALLY DONT KNOW HOW THE FEBRUARY 2 I WiLL HAVE TO LEAVE IT TO ONE SiDf Q a HIGHER OFFICIALS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE -OLD US 'THAT DA"E- HELL, IN THAT EVENT RUSK WE WERE WRONG. UNCUO1E A c I UNCLASSIFIED i 271